Title: Grants and incentives
Quick Links
Affordable housing incentivesCouncil policies to encourage developing new affordable rental housing units.
Bloomberg Youth Climate Action FundWe've joined Bloomberg Philanthropies' new Youth Climate Action Fund.
Brownfield incentive programRenewal and revitalization of former manufacturing and historic properties.
Community Development Infrastructure ProgramA grant for groups to address issues they have found in their communities.
Community grantsFinancial opportunities for not-for-profit and community organizations.
Façade grant programFinancial incentive for eligible downtown businesses to improve their façades.
Facility grantsSave money on the cost of hosting an event at a city-run facility.
Heritage fundingInformation and resources about properties eligible to apply for funding.
LoveMyHood matching grantGrant that supports resident-led projects in our neighbourhoods.
RISE Fund: Racialized and Indigenous Supports for EquityA grant for Black, Indigenous and racialized groups and organizations.
Startup grant programGrant program for property owners of underused downtown spaces for startups.
Travel assistance grantReduce the cost of out-of-town trips to sports tournaments and events.
Youth summer employment supportYou could qualify for up to $300 to help cover costs preventing you from applying for a summer job with us.
Affordable housing incentives
Council policies to encourage developing new affordable rental housing units.
Bloomberg Youth Climate Action Fund
We've joined Bloomberg Philanthropies' new Youth Climate Action Fund.
Brownfield incentive program
Renewal and revitalization of former manufacturing and historic properties.
Community Development Infrastructure Program
A grant for groups to address issues they have found in their communities.
Community grants
Financial opportunities for not-for-profit and community organizations.
Façade grant program
Financial incentive for eligible downtown businesses to improve their façades.
Facility grants
Save money on the cost of hosting an event at a city-run facility.
Heritage funding
Information and resources about properties eligible to apply for funding.
LoveMyHood matching grant
Grant that supports resident-led projects in our neighbourhoods.
RISE Fund: Racialized and Indigenous Supports for Equity
A grant for Black, Indigenous and racialized groups and organizations.
Startup grant program
Grant program for property owners of underused downtown spaces for startups.
Travel assistance grant
Reduce the cost of out-of-town trips to sports tournaments and events.
Youth summer employment support
You could qualify for up to $300 to help cover costs preventing you from applying for a summer job with us.


Title: View our Parking and non-parking tickets page
Pay a ticket
You canpay your parking or non-parking ticket online. We accept Visa and MasterCard.
If you lost your ticket or have any questions, call 519-741-2345.
There is a $1.50 charge for online payments.
Can’t find your ticket number in our system?
It may take up to 14 days for your ticket to enter our system. If no results are found for your ticket number, please check back later.
Other payment methods
You can also:
pay in person, by cash, cheque or debit at City Hall’s Revenue Desk at200 King Street West(book an appointment) or at our bylaw enforcement office at33 Ontario Street Northdrop off a cheque with your ticket in a payment box onYoung Street outside of city hallmail your cheque payment to:
City of Kitchener - Revenue Division200 King St. W.P.O. Box 9058Kitchener, ON N2G 4G7
Bylaw guide
Visit ourbylaw guide pageto find our bylaws, including noise, parking, animals, fireworks and more.
Dispute a ticket
If you disagree with a ticket, you can request a review from a screening officer within 30 days of getting the ticket.
To request a review:
call 519-741-2345send us an email
If you request a review from a screening officers after the 30 day mark but before 60 days after getting the ticket, the screening officer will review the request and decide if a review of the ticket will happen.
After a screening officer reviews your ticket, you canrequest a review from a hearing officerif you are not satisfied with their decision. You must also make this request within 30 days of getting the ticket. This decision will be final and binding.
Hearing officers
A hearing officer is an independent, third-party contractor who holds hearings for parking penalties in Kitchener and Waterloo. Hearings take place once a month. The decision made by the hearing officer is final and binding.
Authorize a representative
You canauthorize someone to act on your behalfrelated to your ticket (including during a hearing). The registered owner of the vehicle needs to fill out the form and give their signed consent.
Submit a complaint
If you have concerns about the screening or hearing process,submit a complaint. You cannot submit a request or oppose a screening or hearing decision using this form.
Related documents
If you want to see disclosure documents related to your ticket, fill out ouronline form.
Request an extension
If you cannot address your ticket within the allowed timeframe, you canrequest an extension. We will only grant an extension if there are extenuating circumstances.


Title: View our Property standards page
Property standards guidelines
Our main property standards are:
all structures must be sound, and all exterior walls and roofs are required to be free of water leaks, painted or otherwise treated, or waterproofedall heating, plumbing and mechanical systems and elevating devices must be maintained and operate in good working orderresidential occupancy must meet minimum requirements for ceiling heights, ventilation, potable water and an adequate supply of hot waterall exterior property areas shall be kept clear of inoperative vehicles and garbage
Find the full property standards in ourmunicipal code.
When we get a complaint
Bylaw officers investigate property standard complaints. If we find a violation, we will issue a Notice of Violation or property standards order, explain the issue to the owner and require that it be fixed within a set period.
Appealing an order
You have the right to appeal an order to the Property Standards Committee if you do not think it is valid, as per our guidelines. The committee can uphold the order, rescind the order, or change the timeline of the order.
To appeal an order, download ournotice of appeal form. After filling it out, send it and the non-refundable fee by registered mail or deliver both pieces to:
City of KitchenerLegislated Services, Attention: Property Standards Appeal Committee Secretary200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4G7
If your notice of appeal arrives after the date of appeal listed on the Order to Comply, it will not be processed. In this case, you will get the fee back.
Failure to comply with an order
If an owner fails to comply with a property standards order, we may take action to complete necessary repairs. Any costs associated with our work on the property will be applied to the tax roll of the property. We may also initiate legal action.
The maximum fine for non-compliance with a property standards order is $50,000 for an individual and $100,000 for a corporation.


Title: Visit our development and construction page
Quick Links
Official PlanObjectives and policies to help coordinate our future planning and development.
ZoningZoning information, including our zoning bylaw and review.
Site plansYou may need to submit a site plan application, depending on your project.
Community plansOur community plans help guide the development of large areas.
Building permitsEverything you need to know about getting a building permit in Kitchener.
EngineeringEngineering permits and information to help with your project.
Current planning applicationsMap with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
ConstructionNew and restorative structure and infrastructure construction work information.
Heritage permits and guidelinesApply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Urban designArchitecture, landscape and planning practices used to design Kitchener spaces.
Fire safetyFire safety resources for your development.
Understanding city planningLearn about land use planning in Kitchener.
Resources for builders and developersList of resources and information on City of Kitchener development requirements.
Official Plan
Objectives and policies to help coordinate our future planning and development.
Zoning
Zoning information, including our zoning bylaw and review.
Site plans
You may need to submit a site plan application, depending on your project.
Community plans
Our community plans help guide the development of large areas.
Building permits
Everything you need to know about getting a building permit in Kitchener.
Engineering
Engineering permits and information to help with your project.
Current planning applications
Map with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Construction
New and restorative structure and infrastructure construction work information.
Heritage permits and guidelines
Apply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Urban design
Architecture, landscape and planning practices used to design Kitchener spaces.
Fire safety
Fire safety resources for your development.
Understanding city planning
Learn about land use planning in Kitchener.
Resources for builders and developers
List of resources and information on City of Kitchener development requirements.


Title: View our When you need a building permit page
Popular projects
Not sure if you need a building permit? Check below for some popular projects.
Do need a permit
building a detached structure, other than a shed, 108 square feet or greaterbuilding a shed that meets any of these criteria:more than 161 square feetmore than one storeyattached to another structureused for any purpose other than storagecontains plumbingbuilding an attached carport or other roof structure of any sizebuilding a porch or deck more than 24 inches above gradefinishing your basementadding a bedroom to a basementcreating an addition to a buildingcreating an in-law suite, accessory apartment or granny flatadding or removing plumbing structures
Seemore projectsthat you need a building permit to complete.
Don't need a permit
building a fence that follows our zoning bylawbuilding a detached structure, other than a shed, that’s less than 108 square feet, like a gazebobuilding a shed that meets all of these criteria:smaller than 161 square feet in gross areaone storey in building heightnot attached to a building or any other structureused only for storage purposes ancillary to a principal building on the lotdoes not have plumbinginstalling a water softenerreplacing a plumbing fixture in the same place
Seemore projectsthat you don't need a building permit to complete.
When you need a building permit
The list below includes examples of projects that need a building permit. It is not a complete list.
If you have questions about your project or building permits, call us at 519-741-2312.
building a detached garage or accessory structure, other than a shed, 108 square feet or greater (measured to the outside face of exterior walls)building a shed that meets any of these criteria:more than 161 square feetmore than one storeyattached to another structureused for any purpose other than storagecontains plumbingbuilding an attached carport or other roof structure of any sizebuilding a porch or deck greater than 24 inches above gradefinishing the basement of a houseadding a bedroom to the basementconstructing an addition to a buildingbuilding an enclosure for aswimming poolwith a depth of 36 inches or greater (including temporary or inflatable)creating a duplex (in-law suite, accessory apartment, granny flat)adding or moving plumbing fixturesremoving a load-bearing wall,column, lintel or beamre-insulating walls, ceilings or floorsadding a wood stove or wood-burning fireplaceinstalling a new window or door, or increasing the width of the existing openingbuilding a retaining wall that is greater than three feet and three inches in height, pending locationmounting solar panels to a building that have a face area of five square metres or greaterinstalling or altering a septic systeminstalling site servicing (water or sewer lines) for all building typesbuilding new residential dwellingsdemolition of residential buildings, buildings with residential units and minor demolitionsinstalling atent or group of tentsthat is more than 60 square metres (646 square feet) in aggregate ground area, attached to a building or constructed within three metres (nine feet and 10 inches) of any structureconstructing or altering anindustrial, commercial, institutional and multi-residentialbuildinginstalling a backflow prevention device for lawn irrigation systems connected to potable waterchanging the heating source in an existing building (ex. electric baseboard heaters replaced with forced air gas, or vice versa)
We do not review or inspect electrical work. Please contact theElectrical Safety Authorityat 1-877-ESA-SAFE (1-877-372-7233) for electrical permits.
When you don’t need a building permit
The list below includes examples of projects that do not need a building permit.
building a detached structure, other than a shed (like a garage or gazebo) that's less than 108 square feet in size, measured from the outside face of walls (that does not have plumbing)building a shed that meets all of these criteria:smaller than 161 square feet in gross areaone storey in building heightnot attached to a building or any other structureused only for storage purposes ancillary to a principal building on the lotdoes not have plumbinginstalling a gas fireplacebuilding afence, but the fence must comply with ourzoning bylawinstalling a water softenerpainting, wall papering, tiling, carpeting, cabinets, countertops and similar finish workreplacing a door or window within an existing opening, where no structural members are changed, and no fire-resistance rating is in placeinstalling new shingles on an existing roofremoving a non-load-bearing wall in a single, semi-detached or townhouse dwellingreplacing a plumbing fixture (toilet, bathtub or sink) with a new fixture in the same location
How to apply for a building permit
You can apply for a residential building permit using ouronline services tool.
To apply in person, pleasebook an appointment.
If you have any questions about residential projects,send us an emailor call 519-741-2433.
To apply for a building permit for a triplex, apartment or ICI project, visit ourapply for a building permit page.


Title: View our Rental spaces page
Rent a facility
Fill out ourrental inquiry formif you are interested in renting one of our facilities. After you fill out the form, staff will reach out to confirm the details of your event and provide a detailed quote. Please note that completing the rental inquiry form does not confirm a booking.
City facilities
FacilityCapacityCostLicensedArena meeting roomsActiva Sportsplex,135 Lennox Lewis WayThe Aud,400 East Avenue12 to 220 people$21.57 to $66.06 per hour, including HSTVisitThe Aud's websitefor full rental ratesYesBreithaupt Centre350 Margaret Avenue8 to 300 people$21.58 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theBreithaupt Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoBridgeport Community Centre20 Tyson Drive20 to 180 people$21.58 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theBridgeport Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoBudd Park1111 Homer Watson Boulevard60 people$54.68 per hour, including HSTYesCameron Heights Pool301 Charles Street EastPool rentals onlyVaries based on time and type of rentalVisit theCameron Heights Pool pagefor rental ratesNoCentreville Chicopee Community Centre141 Morgan Avenue15 to 160 people$21.58 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theCentreville Chicopee Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoChandler Mowat Community Centre222 Chandler Drive9 to 235 people$21.58 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theChandler Mowat Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoCity Hall meeting rooms200 King Street West16 to 150 people$87.09 to $387.42 for three hours, including HSTVisit theCity Hall rentals pagefor full rental ratesNoThe Conrad Centre for the Performing Arts36 King Street West260 to 400 peopleSend us an emailfor rental ratesNoCountry Hills Community Centre100 Rittenhouse Road4 to 350 people$30.77 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theCountry Hills Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoDoon Pioneer Park Community Centre150 Pioneer Drive20 to 300 people$21.47 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theDoon Pioneer Park Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoDoon Valley Golf Course500 Doon Valley Drive20 to 120 people$123 to $615 for a half day, including HST$202 to $935 for a full day, including HSTVisit theDoon Valley Golf Course pagefor full rental ratesYes, for on-site catererNo outside alcohol allowedDowntown Community Centre35 Weber Street West6 to 400 people$21.58 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theDowntown Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoForest Heights Community Centre1700 Queen’s Boulevard5 to 200 people$21.58 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theForest Heights Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoForest Heights Pool235 Fischer-Hallman RoadPool rentals onlyVaries based on time and type of rentalVisit theForest Heights Pool pagefor rental ratesNoGaukel Block44 Gaukel StreetOutdoor facility, no capacity limitSend us an emailfor rental ratesNoHuron Community Centre80 Tartan Avenue100 people$30.76 per hour, including HSTVisit theHuron Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoKingsdale Community Centre72 Wilson Avenue5 to 235 people$30.77 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theKingsdale Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoKitchener Market300 King Street East85 to 450 people$61.29 to $232.22 per hour, including HSTVisit theKitchener Market websitefor full rental ratesYesKiwanis park and pool1000 Kiwanis Park DriveOutdoor facility, no capacity limit$30.77 to $35.87 per hour, including HSTGuest admission into Kiwanis Park is separateVisit theKiwanis park and pool pagefor full rental ratesNoLyle Hallman Pool meeting rooms600 Heritage Drive30 to 175 people$21.57 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theLyle Hallman Pool pagefor full rental ratesNoLyle Hallman Pool pool rentals600 Heritage DrivePool rentals onlyVaries based on time and type of rental.Visit theLyle Hallman Pool pagefor rental ratesNoMill Courtland Community Centre216 Mill Street15 to 75 people$21.58 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theMill Courtland Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoPicnic sheltersBreithaupt Park,806 Union StreetKiwanis shelter at Kiwanis Park,1000 Kiwanis Park DriveVictoria Park,32 Dill StreetOutdoor facility, no capacity limitFreeFor the Kiwanis shelter, guest admission into Kiwanis Park is separateNoPicnic sheltersBeachside shelter at Kiwanis Park,1000 Kiwanis Park DriveTim Hortons shelter at Kiwanis Park,1000 Kiwanis Park DriveOutdoor facility, no capacity limit$30.77 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTGuest admission into Kiwanis Park is separateVisit theKiwanis park and pool pagefor full rental ratesNoRockway Centre1405 King Street East10 to 100 people$21.58 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theRockway Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoRockway Golf Course625 Rockway Drive20 to 120 people$123 to $615 for a half day, including HST$202 to $935 for a full day, including HSTVisit theRockway Golf Course pagefor full rental ratesYes, for on-site catererNo outside alcohol allowedStanley Park Community Centre505 Franklin Street North12 to 450 people$30.77 to $103.94 per hour, including HSTVisit theStanley Park Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoVictoria Hills Community Centre10 Chopin Drive6 to 350 people$21.58 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theVictoria Hills Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoVictoria Park Pavilion80 Schneider Avenue250 peopleVaries based on the type of event, find costs on theVictoria Park Pavilion pageYesWilliamsburg Community Centre1187 Fischer-Hallman Road, unit 62030 to 55 people$30.77 to $51.17 per hour, including HSTVisit theWilliamsburg Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoWilliamsburg Dedication Centre1541-B Fischer-Hallman Road110 peopleVaries based on the day of the week, visit theKitchener Cemeteries websitefor ratesYes
For rentals at all facilities,other feesmay apply.
Ice rentals
Ice rentals are available at The Aud and our other arenas. Learn more onThe Aud's website.
Mobile skatepark
You can rent themobile skateparkfor events.
includes:delivery of trailerset up of elements and supervision of the program by two staff for three hoursnine ramps, 5-foot quarter pipe, three-piece fly-over box, two 2-foot kicker ramps, two grind railsloaner helmets, skateboards and scootershelmets are mandatory when using the skatepark.The Corporation of the City of Kitchener staff persons are solely responsible for transporting, setting up, supervising the operations, and taking down the Doon Skatium Mobile Skateboard Park.for rentals not on city property, the renters must provide a Certificate of Liability Insurance (minimum coverage $2 million), including The Corporation of the City of Kitchener as an additional insured.
For more information, please contact us at519-741-2200, ext. 5705.
Kitchener Public Library
The Kitchener Public Library (KPL) offers venue rentals for weddings, corporate events, special occasions and more. Learn more on theKPL website.
Facility usage policy
Ourfacility usage policyincludes guidelines on rental requirements.
Licensing and permits
Depending on your event, you may need to apply for and obtain licensing or permits:AGCO (Alcohol and Gaming Commission of Ontario) special events permit for serving alcoholprivate eventpublic eventbuilding permit(examples: tents or other structures)business licence(example: food trucks)lottery licence(required for any type of lottery, including bingo or raffles)music licensing through SOCAN(Society of Composers, Authors and Music Publishers of Canadanoise exemptionRegion of Waterloo Public Health food services
Other fees
When booked after business hours, we require a three-hour minimum rental. Additional staff charges will apply.
Depending on the nature of your event, other costs may include:
Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensing
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding friendly. Anytime. Anywhere. The City of Kitchener operates family friendly facilities and supports breastfeeding mothers.


Title: View our Miscellaneous permits and applications page
Application process
Visit ourapply for a building permit pageto find:
how to apply for a permitprocessing timesdrawing requirementspermit feeswhat happens when we issue your permitinformation about inspections
All projects must follow ourzoning bylaws.
If you're looking for a building permit for your home, visit ourresidential building permits page.
Adding solar panels
You need a building permit for any solar collector with an aggregate face area of 5 sq. m. or greater that is mounted to a building or structure.
Existing buildings must be evaluated for the extra loading the solar panels apply to the roof assembly. Solar panels may add dead loads to the structure and can also cause extra wind uplift and live loads (snow accumulation due to placement of panels). Transfer of loads through the panel mounting systems may cause a relocation of where and how the loads are applied to the roof assembly (uniform and/or point loads). If insufficient capacity is identified systems would have to be strengthened.
Some building owners may want to install a system without proper review, but you must take proper steps to ensure the protection of your building and the safety of its occupants.
Use the accordions below to find the requirements to apply for this building permit.
Feespermit fee: $95rebate fee for single & semi-detached home or duplex: $250rebate fee for most other buildings: $1,000Rebate fees are automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved.Formsapplication formConstruction drawings - single family and duplex1. Plan viewlocation of panels on building2. Building system review (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)identify existing structural system including sizes and spacingletter showing existing roof and supporting structure are adequate to support loads from new solar collectors3. Supplementary construction, if upgrades are needed (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)identify size and location of any supports or bracing to be provided to existing systemsprescribe size and location of all new supportsconfirm all loads are sufficiently transferred to footings4. Fastening system info (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)panel mounting detailsize and spacing of fasteners, rails and supportslocation of panels on existing structure along with corresponding location of supporting elements in these area5. Pre-manufactures mounting rail system manufacture specifications6. Solar panel manufacture specificationsConstruction drawings - multi-residential, ICI1. Plan viewlocation of panels on building2. Building system review (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)identify existing structural system including sizes and spacingletter showing existing roof and supporting structure are adequate to support loads from new solar collectors3. Supplementary construction, if upgrades are needed (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)identify size and location of any supports or bracing to be provided to existing systemsprescribe size and location of all new supportsconfirm all loads are sufficiently transferred to footings4. Fastening system info (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)panel mounting detailsize and spacing of fasteners, rails and supportslocation or panels on existing structure along with corresponding location of supporting elements in these areas5. Mounting rail system details (by Professional Engineer of Ontario)6. Solar panel manufacture specificationsUpon completion of the solar installation a Professional Engineer of Ontario must review the installation and provide a certification letter to the Building Inspector.
Adding a backflow device
Backflow happens when water flows in the opposite direction. For instance, instead of running from the city's water system into a business or home, the water runs the reverse way. That means whenever a foreign substance, such as a bottle of weed killer is connected to the end of a garden hose, the potential for pollution is created.
A backflow preventer (BFP) can stop this problem before it happens. These devices ensure unwanted substances do not enter the city's clean water supply.
Feespermit fee: $104.32 per deviceFormsapplication form- ensure permit description explains the location of the device
Installing or altering a septic system
A septic system processes all the wastewater from your house. You need a building permit if you are installing, repairing, altering or disconnecting a septic system.
Feespermit fee: new system $462, major repair $231, minor repair $95rebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Formsapplication formschedule 1 formschedule 2 formfrom the sewage system installerSite planShow these items on your site plan:location of new septic systemConstruction drawingssewage system design report
Emergency water service repairs (outside of business hours)
For emergency water service repairs on private property, you must complete the requirements for theemergency water service repair permit. You must apply for a permit at City Hall the next business day.
Emergency water or sewer replacement or repair (during business hours)
For emergency water service or sewer repairs on private property, you need a building permit before starting the work. You must apply for a permit at City Hall. A building inspector must inspect the repair or replacement.
Feespermit fee: $95 or $0.59/linear footFormsapplication form
Water, sewer, storm - new or replacement
You need a building permit to replace or install a new water, storm or sewer service connection on private property.
Feespermit fee: $95 minimum or $0.59 per linear footFormsapplication formsite planshowing the location of the proposed water, sewer or storm
Tent
Tents require a building permit when the area of the structure exceeds 60m² (645sf) or when the area of two or more tents exceeds 60 square metres (645 square feet). Two or more tents are considered a group of tents if the tents are not more than 3.0 metres apart. A tent or group of tents may not require a permit if they are:less than 60 square metres (645 square feet) in total (aggregate) ground area;not attached to a building; andconstructed more than 3 metres from all other structuresUse the accordions below to find the requirements to apply for this building permit.Feespermit fee: $163 per sitePermit and rebate fees are due when the permit is submitted. We must receive the fees in order to start the permit review timeline and process. See ourfee scheduleorsend us an emailfor help with the fee calculations. If a code review is required for determining the permit fees, the rebate fee is still required at the time of permit submission.Application requirementsapplication formsite plan(next accordion)interior plansfabric specifications and certificate (material must meet the requirements of CAN/ULC S109-M or NFPA 701)tent information formletter of approval from our transportation division if you’re building the tent on a city road (call 519-741-2379 for more information)If your tent is larger than 225 square metres (2421 square feet):structural plans stamped and signed by a professional engineer, including framing and anchorage detailscommitment to general review form (architect or engineer)If your tent will be up for more than 14 days:site plan (next accordion)Site planShow the location of the tent in relation to:other structuresproperty linesPlease show dimensions less than 3 metres (10 feet).Include these locations:fire routesoverhead wireswashroomsIf your tent will be up for more than 14 days, you need toapply for a site plan.Interior plansIf setting up a tent with no walls, show the location of:furniturefire extinguishersIf setting up a tent with walls, show the location of:furniturefire extinguishersmeans of egressexitsIf using a tent after dusk, show the location of:exit signsemergency lightingMore informationif you need hydro service, visit theElectric Safety Authority websiteor call 1-877-372-7233if you need a copy of your building plan or property survey, you cansubmit a request online
Demountable stages and demountable support structures
You need a permit for demountable stage(s) that are:
more than 60 sq.m (646 sq.ft) in area and any part of its platform(s) is more than 3m in height above adjacent grade level, ormore than 225 sq.m (2422 sq.ft) in combined area, orany part of the platform or any roof, wall or structure attached to or located on any of the platforms is 5m or more in height above adjacent ground level.
You need a permit for demountable support structure(s) that are:
more than 3m high above adjacent ground level,designed to carry superimposed specified loads greater than 115 kg, orwould create a hazard to the public.
Use the accordions below to find the requirements to apply for these types of building permits.
Feespermit fee: $163 per event per propertyPermit fees are due when the permit is submitted. We must receive the fees in order to start the permit review timeline and process. See ourfee scheduleorsend us an emailfor help with the fee calculations.Application requirementsapplication formcommitment to general review from(engineer)demountable stage & demountable support structure information formsite plan(next accordion)structural plans stamped and signed by a professional engineer, for stage(s) and any/all support structures, including framing and anchorage detailselevation drawingstage floor plan / layout and details, applicable to stages only (see accordion below)flame resistance specifications and certificate for any tarpaulins, decorative materials, fabrics or films attached to the demountable stage or demountable support structure (material must meet the requirements of CAN/ULC-S109 or NFPA 701)Site planShow the location of the demountable stage and/or demountable support structures in relation to:other structuresproperty linesInclude these locations:fire routesoverhead wiresStage floor plan/layout drawing and details (for stages only)Floor plan drawing of the stage platform showing:overall dimensionsegress stairstravel distanceguard locations (if guards required by OBC)Other general information and details to be provided:stair detailsguard details (if guards required by OBC)ramp construction details (if applicable)More informationif you’re erecting a stage or support structure on a city road, contact our transportation division (call 519-741-2379 for more information)if you need hydro service, visit theElectric Safety Authority websiteor call 1-877-372-7233if you need a copy of your building plan or property survey, you cansubmit a request online
Outdoor patios
You will need a patio application for outdoor patios associated with a building, or a suite within a building (example: restaurant) if they are:
new or modifiedpermanent or temporary/seasonallocated on grade (examples: sidewalk, parking lot, etc.), or located on a structure (examples: raised deck, platform, etc.).
Use the accordions below to find the requirements to apply for the new or modified outdoor patio.
If you previously had an approved outdoor patio application and are looking to renew the application, visit ourpatio program page.
FeesThere are no fee charges for an outdoor patio application from the Building Division.However, other fees may be applicable:encroachment agreement fees (when the patio is located on city property)site plan approval fees (when the patio is subject to site plans approval)building permit fees (when the patio includes a structure such as a roof, deck, or tent that required a separate building permit)Application requirementsoutdoor patio application formRequired planssite plandrawing that identifies the location and boundary of the patio in relation to the property boundaries, building(s), and other site structures and features.patio layout drawing, must include:overall dimensions of the patioentrance of the patio and building/restaurantlocation of entrances / exits for the existing adjacent building / restaurantshow location of any fencing or planters used to define the patio (e.g.: flowerpots, fencing, painted lines, etc.)location of all tables and chairssizes and dimensions of all tables and chairs (e.g., 2’ square)proposed number of chairs at each tablehost/hostess stand if applicablewidths of all walkways/aisle waysdistance between tables/seating and edge of patiolocation of any structures (roof, pop-ups, shade sails, tents, etc.). A separate building permit may be required for these structures, see thepatio guidelinesfor more information regarding patio structureslocation of exterior mounted sprinkler / standpipe fire house connections (if applicable)locations of existing trees and furniture (e.g.: light posts, planters, garage bins, bollards, etc.)exterior mounted fire department connections (sprinkler/standpipe), if applicablecurbs and parking spaces (if applicable)


Title: View our Snow removal questions page
General snow removal
What should I do if a snow event is declared?When we declare a snow event, you cannot park on city streets and we maytag and towyour car.To learn more about snow events and how to get an email if we declare one, visit oursnow removal page.What should I do if a significant weather event is declared?When we declare a significant weather event, please avoid unnecessary travel and use caution when outdoors. A significant weather event does not include a daytime street parking ban unless a snow event is also active.To learn more about significant weather events and how to get an email if we declare one, visit oursnow removal page.What should I do when it snows?When it starts snowing, please:clear snow and ice from your sidewalksdon’t push snow back onto the roadon collection day, put your garbage and recycling on your property and not on the roadremind kids not to climb or play on snowbanksclear your fire hydrant or gas meter if it’s buriedIf we declare a Snow Event, please respect our bylaws and do not park on the road.
Sidewalks
How often do I need to shovel the sidewalk?After the snow stops falling, you have 24 hours to shovel your sidewalks to bare pavement.When we get a complaint about an unshovelled sidewalk, we inspect the property and issue a notice to the homeowner. If the sidewalk is not clear when we inspect it again, we’ll invoice the homeowner for snow removal.During a snow event and significant weather event, the timeline for sidewalk clearing stays the same.I can’t clear my sidewalks, is there help available?On oursnow removalpage, we’ve collected resources for people who need help with sidewalk clearing.Why doesn’t the city plow sidewalks?Budget constraints prevent us from offering this service. According to acity report on winter sidewalk maintenance(2016), municipalities that implemented city-wide sidewalk snow-clearing identified that service levels are inconsistent, and sidewalks are maintained to snow-packed, not bare, conditions.Why do plows throw snow on my sidewalk?Sorry! There is no way to avoid pushing snow into driveway entrances during plowing operations. To avoid extra work, you could delay clearing your driveway entrance until your street has been cleared.Plows must drive at a minimum speed to throw snow off to the side. Some sidewalks are close to the curb and it’s hard to avoid getting snow on them. Please call 519-741-2345 to report these situations and we may remove the snow.Who removes snow from around fire hydrants or mailboxes?If the fire hydrant near your home is buried by snow, please dig it out. You can also call:Kitchener Fire at 519-741-2582City of Kitchener at 519-741-2529, option 3If a community mailbox is blocked by snow, please call Canada Post at 1-800-267-1177.Who removes snow from bus stops?Grand River Transit removes snow from bus stops. Please call 519-585-7555 to report any issues.
Roads
Does a snow event or significant weather event mean that the city isn't clearing roads?During asnow eventorsignificant weather event, City maintenance crews will be working as usual to clear city roads, but the weather conditions mean it may take longer for crews to clear the roads as quickly as they would under regular winter conditions. During a snow event, it is important to move your parked car off the street to make sure maintenance crews can work effectively and maintain their regular plowing schedule as much as possible.To stay up to date on how the City prioritizes different roads during plowing operations, check out oursnow plow priorities map. During a snow event, you can also refer to theGetting Around mapto see which routes have been cleared.Why can’t the city remove snow that was plowed into my driveway?It is too costly and time-consuming to have extra staff and equipment to offer this service.Why don’t you use less sand and salt on the roads?Before a snow event, we apply an anti-icing salt brine to roads. This brine is mixed with salt enhancer and uses less salt than traditional materials. The brine helps prevent snow and ice from bonding to the pavement.If there is ice on the roads, we use sand or salt. We use sand when the temperature is below -12°C. When the temperature is about -12°C, we use salt on hills and intersections.What do I do about damaged grass?We start fixing exposed grass areas after the snow is done falling, usually in April. When we fix grass, we apply topsoil, grade and seed the area.It can take up to six weeks for staff to repair grass around the city.If there is damaged grass on city property or at a bus stop, please call:519-741-2345 for city property519-585-7555 for bus stops


Title: Bylaws and enforcement
Quick Links
Bylaw guideCommon bylaws, including noise, parking, property standards and more.
Noise complaints and exemptionsLearn about our noise bylaw and how to file a noise complaint.
Bylaws at homeOur most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Parking bylawsOur parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Parking and non-parking ticketsPay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bylaws (municipal code)Our full municipal code, including links to our bylaw documents.
Pets and animalsDog licensing, backyard chickens, coyotes and urban wildlife.
Report a problemUse our online form to report a problem in your neighbourhood.
Report an illegal signIf you see a sign that doesn't comply with our sign bylaws, you can report it online.
Report pollutionYou can report pollution and environmental concerns to the province.
GraffitiReport graffiti you see in our community.
LitterIf you see litter in a city park, report it to make sure it gets cleaned up.
GuidesGuides related to bylaws and enforcement.
Bylaw guide
Common bylaws, including noise, parking, property standards and more.
Noise complaints and exemptions
Learn about our noise bylaw and how to file a noise complaint.
Bylaws at home
Our most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Parking bylaws
Our parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Parking and non-parking tickets
Pay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bylaws (municipal code)
Our full municipal code, including links to our bylaw documents.
Pets and animals
Dog licensing, backyard chickens, coyotes and urban wildlife.
Report a problem
Use our online form to report a problem in your neighbourhood.
Report an illegal sign
If you see a sign that doesn't comply with our sign bylaws, you can report it online.
Report pollution
You can report pollution and environmental concerns to the province.
Graffiti
Report graffiti you see in our community.
Litter
If you see litter in a city park, report it to make sure it gets cleaned up.
Guides
Guides related to bylaws and enforcement.


Title: View our Backflow prevention page
Backflow preventer device
Installing a backflow preventer (BFP) can stop this problem before it occurs. These devices ensure unwanted substances do not enter the city's clean water supply.
There are different BFP devices available to protect different types of cross connections.
Bylaw
We want to reduce backflow by ensuring more backflow preventers are installed or maintained across the city. This is why we have abackflow prevention bylawthat that affects commercial, industrial, institutional, large multi-residential buildings and irrigation systems.
Kitchener Utilities
Visit theKitchener Utilities websiteto learn more about:
backflow preventor installationsbackflow prevention device permit and feesrecognized backflow prevention testersbackflow prevention device inspection and testing reportbackflow codes and standards


Title: View our Pollinators page
The importance of pollinators
There are over 1000 species of pollinating animals in Canada. Although more than 70 per cent of pollination in Canada come from bees, Canada is home to more pollinators than just our buzzing friends. Learn more about thedifferent types of pollinators in Canada.
Start a pollinator garden
It can be difficult to know where to start when created a pollinator garden, especially if you’re new to gardening. Thankfully many of our native pollinator plants need very little, or no maintenance once they’re planted. Learn how toselect the perfect site for your pollinator garden.
Resources
To learn more about starting your pollinator garden and the native plants suited to Kitchener, read more on our partner sites:
Bee City CanadaCanadian Wildlife Native Plant EncyclopediaSeeds of Diversity Pollination Canada ProgramBee City Kitchener Native Plant ListGuide to Selecting Plants for Pollinators


Title: View our Guides page
Quick Links
How to appeal a property standards complaintStep-by-step guide for appealing a property standards complaint.
How to apply for a noise exemptionStep-by-step guide for applying for a noise exemption.
How to make a property standards complaintStep-by-step guide for making a property standards complaint.
How to report a problem or make a bylaw complaintStep-by-step guide for reporting a problem or making a bylaw complaint.
How to report graffitiStep-by-step guide for reporting graffiti.
How to appeal a property standards complaint
Step-by-step guide for appealing a property standards complaint.
How to apply for a noise exemption
Step-by-step guide for applying for a noise exemption.
How to make a property standards complaint
Step-by-step guide for making a property standards complaint.
How to report a problem or make a bylaw complaint
Step-by-step guide for reporting a problem or making a bylaw complaint.
How to report graffiti
Step-by-step guide for reporting graffiti.


Title: View our Noise complaints and exemptions page
Noise bylaw
Our noise bylaw is in effect 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The bylaw limits excessive noise, including:
yellingloud music, radio or TVother unusual noise
City council may grant events exemption from our noise bylaws. Noise exemptions last until 11 p.m. Check thelist of approved noise exemptions.
Read ourfull noise bylaw.
Construction noise
Construction noise is allowed between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. seven days a week.
Noise complaints
To make a noise complaint, call the Waterloo Regional Police Services non-emergency line at519-570-9777.
Apply for a noise exemption
Apply for an exemptionif you’re hosting a small private event like a barbecue, wedding or other party that might have excessive noise. Please allow for seven to 10 days for processing. Based on council policy, we can approve noise exemptions until 11 p.m.
For large scale events, pleasesend us an emailto apply for a noise exemption through the director of bylaw enforcement.
Approved exemptions
Open the accordions below to find information about approved noise exemptions.
900 King Street West - April 2024Melloul-Blamey Construction, for their large slab pours beginning at 6 a.m. until 11 p.m.Dates as follows:April 1, 2April 5, 8, 9April 12,15April 19, 22April 26, 29


Title: View our Coyotes and wildlife page
Feeding wild animals
You cannot feed wildlife in Kitchener. This is a city bylaw and could result in a fine of $5,000.
If you’re having problems with people feeding wildlife in your neighbourhood, call us at519-741-2345.
Why you can’t feed wildlife
Feeding wildlife and leaving food outside can:
cause wild animals to lose their natural fear of humansgive an artificial food source, which can cause overpopulation of some animals and lead to starvation and disease for otherslead to property damage and unwelcome house guestsmake animals dependent on human food sources – this may cause them to lose some of their ability to survive in the wild, resulting in dangerous encounters with people and other animalsput domestic animals, such as dogs and cats, at risk physically, or expose them to disease
Birds and feral cats
Bird feeders are allowed. We reserve the right to address an accumulation of bird feed and/or bird feces, which could attract rodents and rats. If you have a bird feeder, please keep it clean.
Under our bylaw, feral cats are not considered wild animals. That means feeding feral cats is allowed; however, we strongly recommend against doing so, as the food you put out could attract other wildlife.
Sick, injured or orphaned animals
If you are concerned about what you think might be sick, injured or orphaned wildlife please visitthe province's website. You can also contact the Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry Guelph District by calling519-826-4955and selecting option 3 orby email.
Dead animals
If you see a sick or injured animal or an animal that is dead on the road, call the Humane Society at519-745-5615.
Facts about coyotes
Coyotes are active throughout the year during all seasons. Mostly, they keep to themselves and we don’t see or encounter them very often.
During some seasons, they are more active and more likely to be seen:
choosing a matefinding a denhunting and setting up a territory
These are all reasons why coyotes are on the move, and why sightings of coyotes can increase in the spring and fall.
Coyote tips
Coyotes prey on small mammals. To keep your dog(s) safe, make sure you keep them on a leash and don't leave them unattended.Keep your dog(s) inside at night. Keep pet food indoors and clean up after your dog as coyotes are attracted to dog feces.You should never run when you see a coyote (that goes for dogs, too). It brings out their “chase” instinct. Stand still, wave your arms and slowly back away.Coyotes are extremely curious and intelligent animals – they often watch the things happening around them, just as a tourist in a new city would. Young coyotes are immature and very puppy-like: children, and the toys they play with (like balls) can lead a juvenile coyote into play behaviour. If you are concerned that a coyote is paying too much attention to your small dog or child, pick them up and begin making loud noises and/or throwing objects toward (but not at) the coyote to scare it away.
Download ourcoyote fact sheetto learn more.
Goose management
In 2007, we developed a goose management plan to keep the goose population of Victoria Park at a manageable level. This plan does not involve killing or harming geese.
Goose management plan facts
we are not removing all geese from Victoria Parkour goal is to reduce the number of geese in the park to give park guests and other wildlife a safe environmentwe do not kill the young and adult geese when they are removed from the parkthese geese are relocated to an environment inspected and approved by the federalMinistry of Environment and Climate Change, where they can rest and feed before migrating onwardthe eggs removed from the park have not yet incubated, and there are no baby goslings in the eggs that are removedthis plan has been in place since 2007this plan is administered by a licensed agency whose plan is reviewed and approved by the Federal Ministry of the Environment and Climate Change every year
Pests
Learn about the pests listed below on theRegion of Waterloo’s website.
rodents, including rats and micebed bugsmosquitostickshead lice
Kitchener Natural Areas Program
The Kitchener Natural Areas Program (KNAP) offers workshops and events, many about the wild animals living in Kitchener.Check out our upcoming eventsand activities taking place in our natural areas.


Title: Roads
Quick Links
Road closuresInteractive dashboard with road closures in Kitchener, including opening dates.
Road constructionLearn about road construction in Kitchener, including cost and contracts.
How road construction affects youLearn how road construction may impact your neighbourhood and commute.
PotholesLearn about pothole conditions and report a pothole on your route.
Traffic calmingFormal, seasonal and resident-led traffic calming. Making our roads safer.
Bike infrastructureLearn about bike lanes, multi-use trails, bike boxes and other infrastructure.
Snow removalSidewalk shovelling, overnight parking, snow events and snowplow routes.
Parking bylawsOur parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Grand River TransitThe Region of Waterloo's public transit system, including light rail transit.
Road occupancy or work permitsYou need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Regional roadsList of roads owned by the Region of Waterloo.
Traffic signalsThe Region of Waterloo manages traffic signals in Kitchener.
Road closures
Interactive dashboard with road closures in Kitchener, including opening dates.
Road construction
Learn about road construction in Kitchener, including cost and contracts.
How road construction affects you
Learn how road construction may impact your neighbourhood and commute.
Potholes
Learn about pothole conditions and report a pothole on your route.
Traffic calming
Formal, seasonal and resident-led traffic calming. Making our roads safer.
Bike infrastructure
Learn about bike lanes, multi-use trails, bike boxes and other infrastructure.
Snow removal
Sidewalk shovelling, overnight parking, snow events and snowplow routes.
Parking bylaws
Our parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Grand River Transit
The Region of Waterloo's public transit system, including light rail transit.
Road occupancy or work permits
You need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Regional roads
List of roads owned by the Region of Waterloo.
Traffic signals
The Region of Waterloo manages traffic signals in Kitchener.


Title: View our Our neighbourhood strategy page
About Love My Hood
Residents take the lead. The city supports them along the way. That's the vision behind our neighbourhood strategy,Love My Hood.
We know that the best neighbourhoods are made by the people who live there. That's why Love My Hood offers support, tools and funding for the projects you care about. You told us that you're ready to take action in your neighbourhood and we're here to help!
Love My Hood inspires neighbours to get together and make a positive change. Plus, you can make great memories in the process.
Want to learn more about Love My Hood's action items to support Great Places, Connected People and Working Together?Read the full Love My Hood strategy.
Newsletter
We use our Love My Hood newsletter to share new tools and funding opportunities. Sign up to be the first to learn about new initiatives:
Sign up for the Love My Hood newsletter
Community gardens
Community gardens offer access to fresh produce, connect neighbours, give a sense of belonging and improve the look of neighbourhoods.Find out how to start a new community garden in Kitchener.
Resident-led traffic calming
Do you want to slow traffic, bring awareness to pedestrian safety issues or add beauty to your neighbourhood? Here are a few creative ways:
painted crosswalksroadway painting, like intersection muralsplanter boxes on the boulevardneighbourhood lawn signstemporary or "pop-up" measuresalternative uses of parking spaces
To get started,read our guide for resident-led traffic calming.
Love My Hood matching grant
Need cash for a cool idea? We can help! Up to $30,000 is available for projects that renew a public place, strengthen relationships between neighbours or foster neighbourhood pride.
Projects occurring on non-city land are eligible to receive up to $10,000 and events are eligible to receive up to $2,000. Learn how you can get funding to support positive change in your neighbourhood and view the eligibility criteria by visiting theLove My Hood website.
By neighbours, for neighbours
Love My Hood and Kitchener's Neighbourhood Strategy were created in response to what was heard from the community. They represent a collection of achievable actions that the city, community partners and residents can work towards in the coming years.
All the action items in our plan are based on the feedback we received during our community engagement process between 2015 and 2017, in which:
5,343 people took part, which is three people for every street in Kitchener!3,842 hours of conversation were held, which is like talking about neighbourhoods for 160 consecutive days!
Through the 'resident-led, city-supported' vision of Love My Hood, residents have been empowered to lead projects in their neighbourhoods. Since 2017, Love My Hood has supported:
85 resident-led projects in every ward of the city110 unique resident groups (by the end of 2019)46 different neighbourhoods (by the end of 2019)
Since 2017, more than 400 residents have taken the lead in neighbourhood projects, investing over 10,000 hours of volunteer time into the community.
Through these resident-led projects and the online reach of Love My Hood, tens of thousands of residents across the city have been impacted by the strategy.
Visit theLove My Hood websitefor more information.


Title: Keep your home safe
Quick Links
Backyard pool safetyPool safety rules, fence bylaws and proper draining of pools and hot tubs.
Cooking fire safetyCooking is the number one cause of residential fires in Ontario.
Direct DetectA monitoring tool to automatically contact Kitchener Fire if an alarm goes off.
Escape plansMake and practice fire escape plans for every floor of your house.
Fire and carbon monoxide alarmsInformation on how to properly install and service home alarms.
Natural gas emergencyNatural gas leaks are rare, but it's important to know what to look for.
Watermain break repairsWhat to look for, do and expect when a watermain breaks.
Backyard pool safety
Pool safety rules, fence bylaws and proper draining of pools and hot tubs.
Cooking fire safety
Cooking is the number one cause of residential fires in Ontario.
Direct Detect
A monitoring tool to automatically contact Kitchener Fire if an alarm goes off.
Escape plans
Make and practice fire escape plans for every floor of your house.
Fire and carbon monoxide alarms
Information on how to properly install and service home alarms.
Natural gas emergency
Natural gas leaks are rare, but it's important to know what to look for.
Watermain break repairs
What to look for, do and expect when a watermain breaks.


Title: View our Building Kitchener Together page
Building Kitchener Together projects
The following Building Kitchener Together initiatives are supported by federal Housing Accelerator Funding:
Major Transit Station Areas - Growing Together West (complete)Major Transit Station Areas - Growing Together Eastinclusionary zoning (complete)providing city-owned land for affordable housing (ongoing)affordable housing grant pilot (ongoing)four units city-wide (complete)strategic land acquisition (ongoing)climate adaptation plan
Major Transit Station Areas - Growing Together West (complete)
We are changing land userules around major ION transit stationsbeginning with the seven major transit station areas west of the expressway. This will encourage density and responsible growth within core areas. City council approved this project in March 2024. Read thenews releaseto learn more.
Major Transit Station Areas - Growing Together East
Following Growing Together West, we will look to change land use rules in the areas within a five to 10-minute walk from the Block Line and Fairway ION transit stops and future Sportsworld stop. Staff will begin to bring forward recommendations to city council on these land use and zoning changes in 2025.
Inclusionary zoning (complete)
We are requiring developers to build affordable housing units (along with market-based housing) in these areas using a new tool calledinclusionary zoningin our 10 major transit station areas. City council approved this project in March 2024. Read thenews releaseto learn more.
Providing city-owned land for affordable housing (ongoing)
We are providing city-owned lands for affordable or supportive housing projects. This commitment was made through our Housing For All strategy and has already been delivered on through the YW Kitchener-Waterloo supportive housing projects for women experiencing homelessness. In April 2024, we announced the donation of a two-acre parcel of land at River Road East and Ottawa Street North to Habitat for Humanity Waterloo Region. Habitat Waterloo Region will use this land for purpose-built affordable housing that will include a number of larger three and four-bedroom units, as well as some smaller studio, one, and two-bedroom units. Read the fullnews release.
Over the next few years, we will actively look for new opportunities to provide lands for below-market rental and ownership housing and will continue to work directly with affordable housing providers to access these lands and collaborate on the delivery of affordable housing together.
Affordable housing grant pilot (ongoing)
Starting in 2024, the federal government and the City of Kitchener will provide a $10,000-per-unit grant to help build more than 500 new not-for-profit affordable housing units. Funding will help cover early project costs for developments that provide not-for-profit supportive, affordable rental or affordable co-op housing units. Staff are in the early stages of developing a policy to guide this grant and loan program. Applications are expected to open in May 2024.
Four units city-wide (complete)
In March 2024, city council approved zoning and official plan changes to permit up to four dwelling units on any lot that allows a single-detached dwelling, semi-detached dwelling or street fronting townhouse dwelling, subject to regulations. Enabling four units will unlock the potential for up to four dwelling units on about 41,500 residential lots across Kitchener. This provides a significant opportunity for homeowners and developers to expand the number of units in existing neighbourhoods.
Strategic land acquisition (ongoing)
We will make more land available for affordable housing development, especially within our major transit station areas. In addition, we will work directly with interested affordable housing providers to access these lands and collaborate on the delivery of affordable housing together with necessary related community infrastructure.
We will continue to leverage relationships with other Waterloo Region area municipalities to coordinate efforts to expand this affordable housing land development program to grow a pool of development-ready land across the region.
Climate adaptation plan
Through Building Kitchener Together, we will also continue advancing work on ourgreenhouse gas reduction targetsby creating a climate adaptation plan that will be used in the short term to inform land use policy updates as we develop our newOfficial Plan.
Ontario Building Faster Fund
On April 11, 2024, Premier Doug Ford announced that the City of Kitchener would be receiving $14 million in funding from the Building Faster Fund for achieving 139% of our goal for housing starts in 2023.  Details of eligible uses for the fund are being finalized with the Province of Ontario. Read thenews releaseabout the fund to learn more.
Background
We are #BuildingKitchenerTogether through support from the federal and provincial governments and collaborative community efforts, including:
Housing Accelerator Fund (Government of Canada)Building Faster Fund (Government of Ontario)Housing For All strategy (City of Kitchener)Municipal Housing Pledge
Housing Accelerator Fund (Government of Canada)
In November 2023, the federal government announced a $42.4 million Housing Accelerator Fund allocation for the City of Kitchener. This funding will fast-track the construction of 1,216 new homes by early 2027 to help address housing affordability and the increasing demand for housing in our community.
TheHousing Accelerator Fundhelps cut red tape and fast-track at least 100,000 new homes for people in towns, cities and Indigenous communities across Canada. It asks for innovative action plans from local governments and, once approved, provides upfront funding to ensure the timely building of new homes, as well as additional funds upon delivering results. Building Kitchener Together and the transformative projects outlined here are part of our action plan for the Housing Accelerator Fund.
In Budget 2024, the Government of Canada announced additional housing and infrastructure programs that can support further progress on Building Kitchener Together.
Building Faster Fund (Government of Ontario)
TheBuilding Faster Fund (BFF)is a three-year, $1.2-billion provincial program that is designed to encourage municipalities to address the housing supply crisis. The fund rewards municipalities that make significant progress against their targets by providing funding for housing-enabling and community-enabling infrastructure. In April 2024, The City of Kitchener received $14 million in funding for exceeding our 2023 housing target. As we work with the provincial government to determine initiatives eligible under this fund, we will provide updates on our BFF projects.
In Budget 2024, the Province of Ontario announced additional housing-enabling funding programs that can support further progress on Building Kitchener Together.
Housing For All strategy (City of Kitchener)
Housing For Allis the City of Kitchener's comprehensive strategy to realize the right to housing and help make housing affordable using the tools and resources available to a local municipality. In late 2020, we launched this affordable housing strategy and outlined several co-development solutions to increase affordable housing options across the local housing continuum. The five-year strategy outlines seven key priorities and over 40 actions. We developed the Housing For All strategy in collaboration with an advisory committee that included those with lived experience, community partners, post-secondary institutions, the Region of Waterloo, affordable housing service providers and the development industry.
Municipal Housing Pledge
In March 2023, following a request from the Province of Ontario, city council unanimously approved ahousing pledgethat will support the building of 35,000 additional homes in Kitchener by 2031. The pledge is a commitment to advance progress on a variety of strategies and actions that will support the building of new homes. This pledge demonstrates our commitment to unlocking more housing, streamlining development approvals, removing barriers and accelerating planning in support of the province’s housing target.


Title: View our Land use planning and development videos page
Introduction to planning and development
This introduction shows how your community is shaped, now and in the future. It gives an overview of the topics covered throughout our video explainer series.
Our vision for Kitchener
Kitchener is growing fast. We plan to use the opportunities created by this growth to make a great city. We’re building vibrant communities, fostering new experiences and creating a more compelling and dynamic city. The vision for land use and growth is set out in our Official Plan, a policy document that lays out the roadmap for how Kitchener will grow 20 years into the future.
Planning tools
There’s a lot to consider before shovels go into the ground. In this video, we explain the planning tools used in our planning process. Learn about how we plan for growth across Kitchener and in specific neighbourhoods that have unique considerations.
Roles and responsibilities
When a property owner wants to develop a new residential, commercial or industrial use for their land, they begin a process of working with our staff to help them understand the community’s vision for that property and how to best align their goals with that vision. Learn about the roles and responsibilities of a variety of stakeholders to get projects off the ground.
Zoning bylaws and minor variances
If you think of city planning as a puzzle for a complete community, you can imagine how many pieces there could be. Zoning bylaws are pieces of that puzzle. If the Official Plan is the finished puzzle, the vision for how Kitchener will grow and zoning bylaws are pieces of the puzzle that get us to the vision. If a property owner wants to change the zoning on their property, they can request a zoning bylaw amendment or a minor variance.
Site plan review
Site plan review is a process that looks at the design of a proposed development to make sure that city, regional and provincial guidelines are met prior to approval. It relies on experts to ensure that the final project is designed well and reflects our vision for the community.
Tiny homes
Thriving cities need a variety of housing options to meet the current and future needs of all residents. That’s where tiny homes come in! They’re the newest kind of dwelling to enter Kitchener’s mix of housing types, creating new opportunities in our established neighbourhoods.
Tall buildings
Kitchener is growing up. New tall buildings are being built in and around the downtown, near ION stations, along major roads and other strategic areas. These new buildings help us meet our growth targets while protecting our farmland from urban sprawl. It encourages public transit use and efficiently makes use of our existing infrastructure.
Infill and redevelopment
Two of the ways that Kitchener can grow are through infill projects and redevelopment. Infill is the process of developing vacant or underused lands in an existing urban neighbourhood. It can result in a greater mix of housing options, or new commercial properties. Redevelopment occurs when an existing building is converted or expanded into another use – offering housing or business opportunities that reflect the changing needs of the surrounding neighbourhood.
Cultural heritage
Good city planning involves honouring the old while welcoming the new. A building, piece of land or neighbourhood can be historically significant for a variety of reasons. It’s possible for these places to change somewhat while retaining a sense of place and history. We work to strike this balance – conserving our heritage while meeting the needs of a growing community.
Planning 101: introduction to city planning presentation
If you want to learn more about city planning, watch this staff-guided presentation and question and answer session. In this video, staff go over our three main planning processes:
zoning bylaw amendmentssite plan applicationsminor variance applications
This presentation was recorded live in late 2020.


Title: View our RISE Fund: Racialized and Indigenous Supports for Equity page
Categories and grant amounts
The RISE Fund has an annual budget of $150,000, with these maximums and minimums:
maximum annual grant amount for groups: $10,000minimum annual grant amount for groups: $1,000maximum for events: $5,000
Groups are eligible for funding within these categories:
capacity building: groups and organizations can use this funding to provide resources to build and develop internal capacity before launching projects or eventscore operational costs: groups and organizations with core operational costs essential to their workevent funding: an event organized by the group or organization, or a series of small events over time (maximum $5,000)project funding: projects organized by the group or organizationother: we'll consider other requests as long as they still fall within the broader criteria of the grant
Eligibility
This grant is open to formal and informal organizations or community groups in Kitchener. The group can be newly formed for the purpose of a specific project or is a pre-existing group undertaking a project.
Applicants must meet the following application criteria:
the organization or group is led by and for Black, Indigenous and/or racialized individuals or groups in Kitchenercan demonstrate through a budget how groups or organizations propose to use funds, and agree to report back upon completion of the project, including accountability of all revenues, expenses and proof of purchasesthe project, initiative or event will contribute to one or several of the following:decrease inequitiesincrease opportunitiesincrease well-being for Black, Indigenous or other racialized community members in Kitchener
We will not provide grant funding, financial support or any other financial or in-kind contribution to any person, including any individual, body, business, or entity, that hosts, arranges, contributes to or promotes Conversion Practices.Learn more about this policy on LaserFiche.
Apply for the RISE Fund
Applications are closed. Subscribe to this page to get an email when applications open in the future.
Staff contacts
If you have questions about the grant criteria, eligibility, or potential alignment of your project, group or event with the objectives of the RISE Fund, please emailRea Parchment.
If you have questions about the grant process or completing the application form, please emailAmanda Drumondor call519-741-2200, ext. 7591.
Assessment process
OurEquity & Anti-Racism Advisory Committeeis the selection committee for this grant. This committee includes 12 community members representing voices who have been historically underrepresented or excluded, specifically those who are Black, Indigenous, racialized, 2SLGBTQ+ identified, people with disabilities, religious minorities, and the intersections of these identities.
Staff provide facilitative and administrative support. City staff do not have voting privileges in the grant selection.
Grant agreements
All recipients of the RISE Fund will be expected to sign a contract with the City of Kitchener outlining the terms of the agreement in accordance with regulations provided by the City Solicitor.
Final financial reports must be submitted within 8 months of receivingyourcity-issuedcheque unless otherwise discussed and agreed upon. Within the 8-month timeframe, we may request a status update from the recipient(s).
Accessibility and translation
We are committed to helping with all accessibility requests, including language translation. Applications may be submitted in languages other than English, and translation or interpretation services will be provided upon request. Paper versions of the application are also available upon request for pick-up at any of ourcommunity centresor City Hall. If you have any accessibility requirements, please emailAmanda Drumondor call519-741-2200, ext. 7591.
Grant writing for racialized communities workshop
Twice each year, we work with a community organization to deliver a grant-writing workshop for Black, Indigenous and racialized groups and organizations serving those same communities.
Upcoming workshop
Join us for an upcoming workshop:
dates: Thursday, April 11, and Thursday, April 18time: 5:30 to 8:30 p.m.location: Kitchener Public Library
Register online
About the workshop
Facilitators teach the essentials for writing a successful municipal, provincial and federal grant application.
Workshop participants receive guidance and support related to their specific grant application challenges and build practical knowledge and skills that can be applied to all future grant applications.
This workshop covers specifics related to our RISE Fund.
RISE Fund recipients
Open the accordions below to learn about previous RISE Fund recipients.
Abeingo Association CanadaThe RISE Fund will support two of their annual events - the Annual Summer Barbeque and Celebration of Black History Month.African Women's Alliance of Waterloo RegionThe RISE Fund will support the “Shock Proofing Our Homes Against Violence” initiative. This project aims to address the urgent need for awareness, education, and action to combat the pervasive issue of gender-based violence within African communities.Afropolitan CanadaThe RISE Fund will support Afropolitan Canada’s swimming program which is the first national Black swimming program in Canada. The monies will contribute to the continuation of the program teaching swimming to Black women and children who would like to conquer their fear of the water, be comfortable in the water and/or learn new skills.Congress of Black Women - Waterloo RegionThe RISE Fund will support the “Paving the way for ACB Student Success in Waterloo Region” (Show me the MONEY) project. The purpose of the project is to provide Black high school students and their parents/guardians an opportunity to learn about scholarships and empower them to be able to complete scholarship applications so that they can pursue their educational goals following the completion of high school.FindsuriThe RISE Fund while contribute to core operational costs that will allow Findsuri's continued operation, growth, and ability to provide ongoing support to Syrian families seeking to reunite with their missing loved ones and prioritize mental health.Kingsdale Community GardenThe RISE Fund will support the growth of the garden. The Kingsdale Community Garden is inclusive with plots designed to accommodate both young, old, and wheelchair accessible residents with a communion garden section to enable the community to have access to the fresh fruits and vegetables that are in season free of charge.KoraaThe RISE Fund will aid in covering the costs of renting appropriate spaces for the women to practice and play their games. Koraa requires soccer pitches and basketball and volleyball courts to function as a sports league.MedIncludeMedInclude is a web and app-based platform that helps patients who do not speak English as their first language to better understand medical information by transcribing it into simple terms (grade 5 and below) and translating it into multiple languages. Their goal is to increase health equity for newcomers in Kitchener. The RISE Fund will contribute to growing the application by improving the accuracy of medical transcriptions and translations as well as increasing the scope and capacity of the platform.Nigerians in the Region of Waterloo (NIROW)The RISE Fund will support NIROW’s ability to hire a consultant who can assist them in putting the appropriate governing structures in place so that they can continue to attend to growing community needs. This includes reviewing and updating board charters, policies, community by-laws and HR practices.O:se Kenhionhata:tie (Land Back Camp)The RISE Fund supported a Winter Solstice event, a time in which the Indigenous community celebrates with a feast and ceremony. It was held on December 20, 2023 and was open to the broader Black, Indigenous, Racialized, Queer and grassroots communities in Kitchener. An Indigenous family-owned catering company provided the main meal and live music was featured. The ceremony included the giveaway (potlatch), drum circle, smudge, and words from the Elder.Sporas ScatteredThe RISE Fund will contribute to their annual Palestine Festival, an event that brings in the Arab community to celebrate Palestinian culture and heritage. It features Palestinian singers, poetry, cuisine, and trivia. The event focuses on engaging and encouraging Palestinian youth to build relationships with their community and their roots.Previous recipientsSomali Canadian Association of Waterloo Region (SCAWR)Rhythm & Blues CambridgeMuslim Social ServicesThe Caribbean Canadian Association of Waterloo RegionCrow Shield LodgeCKW Naija Mama's GroupBring on the Sunshine (BOTS)Nigerians in the Region of WaterlooSporas ScatteredMuslim Association of Canada Youth InspireEmpower Employment (Mental Mindset Management)Levant CanadaForUsGirlsAfrican Community Wellness Initiative (ACWI)Association of Liberian Immigrants in Kitchener Environs (ALIKE)BeBlendedRohingya Centre of CanadaAction for Women & Family Foundation (AFWAFF)African Family Revival Organization (AFRO)The Coalition of Muslim Women (CMW) of K-WThe Ethiopian Association of KW & Surrounding Areas (EA)Hope for Community DevelopmentMaada'oonidiwag


Title: View our Commissioning documents page
Book an appointment
City Hall is open for in-person services. If you want to plan your visit and reduce waiting times, pleasebook an appointment.Many services are also available online or by phone.
Process
You are required to sign the affidavit in the presence of the commissioner and must show government issued identification that contains a current photo and signature, like a valid driver’s licence or passport.
Send us an emailor call519-741-2203if you need help determining if the commissioner is authorized to sign the document, and to ensure there is a commissioner available.
Cost
document commission: $20
Domestic and foreign pensions
We can commission domestic and foreign pension or proof of life forms.
first form: $15each additional form: $5
We accept cash or debit.
Notary services or certified copies
We do not provide this service. If you need the signature of a notary or certified copies of documents, please contact a lawyer or notary. More information is available on theprovince's website.
Documents we may commission
Upon review of the document, we will determine if the document meets our specifications.
We reserve the right to refuse commissioning services of any document.
city businessaffidavit for lost Outdoors Cardaffidavit for family gift of a used motor vehicleaffidavit of unregistered vehicle (boards, motorcycles, snowmobiles, trailers, etc.)amendment to birth, death or marriage certificatedelayed Statement of Live Birthdomestic and foreign pension or proof of lifeImmunization Exemption form or Statement of ConscienceName Change form (adult and child)Proof of Residency (owner or tenant letters)Statutory Declaration for OSAP - Statement of Common-law Status and Supporting ChildrenStatutory Declaration for a Change of Sex Designation on a Birth Registration of an AdultStatutory Declaration of Apprenticeship HoursStatutory Declaration of Lost Identification (must include police report number)Sworn Statement for the Transfer of a Used Motor Vehicle in the Province of Ontario
Documents we cannot commission
More information about these services is on theprovince's website.
anything specifically requiring a notary publicCertificate of Appointment of Estate Trustee (with or without a will)Certified true copiescohabitation (living in a common-law relationship)divorce, separation or marriage agreementsdocuments involving debt (example: bankruptcy)estate settlement documentsPower of Attorneyreal estate matters (including sale, purchase and mortgages)Travel Affidavit - Parent's Permission to Allow Children to Travel Outside of the Countrywills, estates and trusts


Title: View our E-scooters page
Where you can ride an e-scooter
In the Region of Waterloo, you can ride an e-scooter:
in any bike lane (regardless of the speed limit of the road, but the scooter must be in the bike lane)on any road with a speed limit of 50 km/h or lesson the paved multi-use trails next to streets like Homer Watson Boulevard or Victoria Streetontrails, including theIron Horse Trailor theSpurline Trail
Rules for riding an e-scooter
To ride an e-scooter, you must:
be 16 years of age or olderwear a helmet
When riding an e-scooter, please follow these rules:
you cannot take a passenger (only one person is allowed on each e-scooter)do not ride on the sidewalk (if you need to use a sidewalk to get to a location or parking, you must walk your e-scooter)ride on the right side of the road, keeping as close to the edge of the road as possibleif you're on a mixed-use trail, don't ride much faster than the pedestrians on the trailyield to pedestrians as necessary, and keep a safe distance between youdo not park your e-scooter or leave it in a way that blocks a road or sidewalk
The speed limit for e-scooters in Ontario is 24 km/h. This applies on roads, in bike lanes and on trails.
Before riding an e-scooter, please review these rules:
Ministry of Transportation e-scooter rulesCity of Kitchener bylaw
E-bike and e-scooter rental program
Neuron Mobility e-bikes and e-scooters are available to rent in Kitchener, Waterloo and Cambridge. The e-bikes and e-scooters are available mostly in the downtown areas of the three cities and near transit stations.Download the Neuron Mobility app:on the Apple App Storeon the Google Play StoreLearn more about this program:on the Region of Waterloo's websiteby calling519-626-0347by emailingwaterlooregionsupport@neuron.sgFind rules for riding and how-to-ride information onScootSafe. Choose Waterloo Region to get local information.


Title: View our Building and renovating page
Quick Links
Residential building permitsGet a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
When you need a building permitFind out when you need to apply for a building permit for your project.
Committee of AdjustmentApplication process and meeting schedule for our committee of adjustment.
Your home and propertyProperty standards, encroachment issues and information about termites.
Additional dwelling unitsLearn about the process for additional dwelling units, including tiny homes and basement apartments.
Residential dwelling unitsYou can build up to 10 total residential dwelling units on a residential property.
Backyard pools and hot tubsYou may need a permit for your pool or hot tub, depending on its size.
Heritage permits and guidelinesApply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Driveway wideningGet a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.
Building requestsFile a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.
Residential building permits
Get a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
When you need a building permit
Find out when you need to apply for a building permit for your project.
Committee of Adjustment
Application process and meeting schedule for our committee of adjustment.
Your home and property
Property standards, encroachment issues and information about termites.
Additional dwelling units
Learn about the process for additional dwelling units, including tiny homes and basement apartments.
Residential dwelling units
You can build up to 10 total residential dwelling units on a residential property.
Backyard pools and hot tubs
You may need a permit for your pool or hot tub, depending on its size.
Heritage permits and guidelines
Apply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Driveway widening
Get a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.
Building requests
File a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.


Title: View our Zoning bylaw page
Our zoning bylaws
The zoning bylaw sets out rules on the size and dimensions of property lots, parking requirements, building heights and setbacks from the street.
Kitchener currently has two zoning bylaws:
zoning bylaw 85-1zoning bylaw 2019-051
Because we have two zoning bylaws, this means that a property could be within bylaw 85-1 or within bylaw 2019-051. Since bylaw 85-1 and bylaw 2019-051 have different rules, check which zoning bylaw applies before applying for any permits.
If you would like to change a permitted use for your property or adjust how it is configured, you can request azoning bylaw amendment.
Zoning map
To find out which zoning bylaws currently apply to a property and how it is zoned, enter the address into our online zoning map.
Open our zoning map
If you need help using the map:
download ourquick reference guidesend us an emailwith any questions
Zoning bylaw 85-1
Zoning bylaw 85-1 is the older of our two zoning bylaws and is gradually being replaced by our newer zoning bylaw. About 20% of Kitchener’s properties remain within bylaw 85-1. Remember to confirm which zoning bylaw a property is within before applying for any permits.
The zoning grid schedules and sections below are a consolidated version of bylaw 85-1 and may not always represent the most up-to-date information. If you have any questions,send us an email.
Zoning bylaw 2019-051
Zoning bylaw 2019-051 is the newer of our two zoning bylaws and is gradually replacing our older zoning bylaw as part of ourcomprehensive review of the zoning bylaw (CRoZBy). About 80% of Kitchener’s properties are within bylaw 2019-051. Remember to confirm which zoning bylaw a property is within before applying for any permits.
The zoning grid schedules and sections below are a consolidated version of bylaw 2019-051 and may not always represent the most up-to-date information. If you have any questions, pleasesend us an email.
Proposed amendments to zoning bylaw 2019-051
The following amendments have been proposed for the new zoning bylaw.
“Neighbourhood Planning Reviews” contains a version of bylaw 2019-051 which has been drafted but not approved.
“Stage 2” contains a version of bylaw 2019-051 that was approved by city council on March 21, 2022.


Title: 
Rent a facility
Fill out ourrental inquiry formif you are interested in renting one of our facilities. After you fill out the form, staff will reach out to confirm the details of your event and provide a detailed quote. Please note that completing the rental inquiry form does not confirm a booking.
City facilities
FacilityCapacityCostLicensedArena meeting roomsActiva Sportsplex,135 Lennox Lewis WayThe Aud,400 East Avenue12 to 220 people$21.57 to $66.06 per hour, including HSTVisitThe Aud's websitefor full rental ratesYesBreithaupt Centre350 Margaret Avenue8 to 300 people$21.58 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theBreithaupt Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoBridgeport Community Centre20 Tyson Drive20 to 180 people$21.58 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theBridgeport Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoBudd Park1111 Homer Watson Boulevard60 people$54.68 per hour, including HSTYesCameron Heights Pool301 Charles Street EastPool rentals onlyVaries based on time and type of rentalVisit theCameron Heights Pool pagefor rental ratesNoCentreville Chicopee Community Centre141 Morgan Avenue15 to 160 people$21.58 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theCentreville Chicopee Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoChandler Mowat Community Centre222 Chandler Drive9 to 235 people$21.58 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theChandler Mowat Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoCity Hall meeting rooms200 King Street West16 to 150 people$87.09 to $387.42 for three hours, including HSTVisit theCity Hall rentals pagefor full rental ratesNoThe Conrad Centre for the Performing Arts36 King Street West260 to 400 peopleSend us an emailfor rental ratesNoCountry Hills Community Centre100 Rittenhouse Road4 to 350 people$30.77 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theCountry Hills Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoDoon Pioneer Park Community Centre150 Pioneer Drive20 to 300 people$21.47 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theDoon Pioneer Park Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoDoon Valley Golf Course500 Doon Valley Drive20 to 120 people$123 to $615 for a half day, including HST$202 to $935 for a full day, including HSTVisit theDoon Valley Golf Course pagefor full rental ratesYes, for on-site catererNo outside alcohol allowedDowntown Community Centre35 Weber Street West6 to 400 people$21.58 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theDowntown Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoForest Heights Community Centre1700 Queen’s Boulevard5 to 200 people$21.58 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theForest Heights Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoForest Heights Pool235 Fischer-Hallman RoadPool rentals onlyVaries based on time and type of rentalVisit theForest Heights Pool pagefor rental ratesNoGaukel Block44 Gaukel StreetOutdoor facility, no capacity limitSend us an emailfor rental ratesNoHuron Community Centre80 Tartan Avenue100 people$30.76 per hour, including HSTVisit theHuron Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoKingsdale Community Centre72 Wilson Avenue5 to 235 people$30.77 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theKingsdale Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoKitchener Market300 King Street East85 to 450 people$61.29 to $232.22 per hour, including HSTVisit theKitchener Market websitefor full rental ratesYesKiwanis park and pool1000 Kiwanis Park DriveOutdoor facility, no capacity limit$30.77 to $35.87 per hour, including HSTGuest admission into Kiwanis Park is separateVisit theKiwanis park and pool pagefor full rental ratesNoLyle Hallman Pool meeting rooms600 Heritage Drive30 to 175 people$21.57 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theLyle Hallman Pool pagefor full rental ratesNoLyle Hallman Pool pool rentals600 Heritage DrivePool rentals onlyVaries based on time and type of rental.Visit theLyle Hallman Pool pagefor rental ratesNoMill Courtland Community Centre216 Mill Street15 to 75 people$21.58 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTVisit theMill Courtland Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoPicnic sheltersBreithaupt Park,806 Union StreetKiwanis shelter at Kiwanis Park,1000 Kiwanis Park DriveVictoria Park,32 Dill StreetOutdoor facility, no capacity limitFreeFor the Kiwanis shelter, guest admission into Kiwanis Park is separateNoPicnic sheltersBeachside shelter at Kiwanis Park,1000 Kiwanis Park DriveTim Hortons shelter at Kiwanis Park,1000 Kiwanis Park DriveOutdoor facility, no capacity limit$30.77 to $60.03 per hour, including HSTGuest admission into Kiwanis Park is separateVisit theKiwanis park and pool pagefor full rental ratesNoRockway Centre1405 King Street East10 to 100 people$21.58 to $66.93 per hour, including HSTVisit theRockway Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoRockway Golf Course625 Rockway Drive20 to 120 people$123 to $615 for a half day, including HST$202 to $935 for a full day, including HSTVisit theRockway Golf Course pagefor full rental ratesYes, for on-site catererNo outside alcohol allowedStanley Park Community Centre505 Franklin Street North12 to 450 people$30.77 to $103.94 per hour, including HSTVisit theStanley Park Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoVictoria Hills Community Centre10 Chopin Drive6 to 350 people$21.58 to $85.43 per hour, including HSTVisit theVictoria Hills Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoVictoria Park Pavilion80 Schneider Avenue250 peopleVaries based on the type of event, find costs on theVictoria Park Pavilion pageYesWilliamsburg Community Centre1187 Fischer-Hallman Road, unit 62030 to 55 people$30.77 to $51.17 per hour, including HSTVisit theWilliamsburg Community Centre pagefor full rental ratesNoWilliamsburg Dedication Centre1541-B Fischer-Hallman Road110 peopleVaries based on the day of the week, visit theKitchener Cemeteries websitefor ratesYes
For rentals at all facilities,other feesmay apply.
Ice rentals
Ice rentals are available at The Aud and our other arenas. Learn more onThe Aud's website.
Mobile skatepark
You can rent themobile skateparkfor events.
includes:delivery of trailerset up of elements and supervision of the program by two staff for three hoursnine ramps, 5-foot quarter pipe, three-piece fly-over box, two 2-foot kicker ramps, two grind railsloaner helmets, skateboards and scootershelmets are mandatory when using the skatepark.The Corporation of the City of Kitchener staff persons are solely responsible for transporting, setting up, supervising the operations, and taking down the Doon Skatium Mobile Skateboard Park.for rentals not on city property, the renters must provide a Certificate of Liability Insurance (minimum coverage $2 million), including The Corporation of the City of Kitchener as an additional insured.
For more information, please contact us at519-741-2200, ext. 5705.
Kitchener Public Library
The Kitchener Public Library (KPL) offers venue rentals for weddings, corporate events, special occasions and more. Learn more on theKPL website.
Facility usage policy
Ourfacility usage policyincludes guidelines on rental requirements.
Licensing and permits
Depending on your event, you may need to apply for and obtain licensing or permits:AGCO (Alcohol and Gaming Commission of Ontario) special events permit for serving alcoholprivate eventpublic eventbuilding permit(examples: tents or other structures)business licence(example: food trucks)lottery licence(required for any type of lottery, including bingo or raffles)music licensing through SOCAN(Society of Composers, Authors and Music Publishers of Canadanoise exemptionRegion of Waterloo Public Health food services
Other fees
When booked after business hours, we require a three-hour minimum rental. Additional staff charges will apply.
Depending on the nature of your event, other costs may include:
Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensing
Breastfeeding
Breastfeeding friendly. Anytime. Anywhere. The City of Kitchener operates family friendly facilities and supports breastfeeding mothers.


Title: View our Termites page
Bylaw
Our termite bylaw covers:
the duties of the property ownerpotential ordersremedial actionpowers of entry and inspection powersoffences and penalties
Read thetermite prevention and control bylawto learn more.
About termites
Ontario is home to eastern subterranean termites. These termites:
live underground in large coloniesfeed on available woodprefer damp conditionsbuild shelter tubes to travel above ground to forage up trees or into homes
Before termites get into your home, they must first forage through your yard. Because of this, it’s important to eliminate termite habitats in your yard.
Identifying live termites
Termites are small insects, the size of a grain of rice. Workers are creamy white in colour, while soldiers have an orange head and long mandibles. Unlike maggots, termites have six legs and look like white ants but without a constricted “waist”.
Termite habitats
Stumps, dead trees, wood retaining walls, landscape ties and wood chip mulch provide sheltered conditions which are ideal for termites feeding and nesting. These types of wood are the greatest liabilities to residents and should be removed.
Subterranean termites tend to favour softwoods (pine or spruce) and faster growing hardwoods (aspen). However, they feed on every type of wood. Termites only feed on dead wood and will not attack the sapwood of live trees.
This species of termites will not be found in daylight and will quickly hide when uncovered. They will remain within their food sources, or underground, and will go as far as to build mud tube shelters to avoid being exposed.
Termites may also penetrate building materials like rigid polystyrene insulation boards, plaster, soft plastics and underground cables, even though they do not feed on these materials.
Termites can enter a structure by tunnelling through wood, by building shelter tubes, or by entering cracks in foundations.
Identifying damage
Check for live termites or new shelter tubes to identify termite damage.
Inspect your home
From April through November, you can inspect your yard and inside your house:
lift any moveable wood in contact with soil such as firewood, lumber, or barrels and examine the wood/soil interface for termites or their tunnels.examine stumps by prying off the bark or chopping into them.carefully examine crevices in the bark of large trees for shelter tubes.examine compost bins, garages, sheds, crawl spaces, under porches and decks, and exposed foundation walls.
Check the house starting in the basement using a flashlight and flat-edge screwdriver. If you find shelter tubes, check along their full length. If the ends of shelter tubes are still wet, this means they were recently built, and still active. If the shelter tubes show no cracks or damage, this also means that they may still be active.
Clean up your property
Minimize the risk of hosting termites by working through these tasks:
elevate a shed or doghouse on a concrete padstack firewood and lumber off the ground on a metal rack, concrete pad or patio stones in the sun away from the houseremove pressure-treated edging boards, retaining walls, or railway ties and disposelive trees are usually not infested, but dead trees or a heavily infested live tree should be cut down, the stump excavated or chipped, and the chippings disposedwood chip mulches offer excellent food source for termites and should not be usedmulch sources that don't provide a food source for the termites with 100% bar mulch, cocoa shell mulch, pine bark nuggets, rubberific mulch, peat moss or coffee bean husk
To prevent the further spread of termites, please transport any material and soil suspect of termites from a property within the ‘red zone’ to theRegion of Waterloo landfilland identify as possible termite material to regional staff.
Borate treatment
Wood that is treated naturally deters termites from entering and damaging new or existing wood.
Here's how to treat different wood structures:
wood fence posts: treat them with borate rods.existing woodsheds in good condition: spray them with a topical borate treatment
Nematodes
To reduce colonies and limit the impact of long-term damage and further forging into private property, apply entomopathogenic nematodes every May and September to the entire property (purchased at garden centres or hire a lawn care company).
For the nematodes to survive and penetrate the surface they need to be applied during or shortly after rainy conditions. If this is not possible the nematodes need to be watered in using garden hoses or irrigation systems.


Title: View our Pre-submission consultation page
When you need a consultation
You need to attend a pre-submission consultation meeting before you apply for any of these projects:
Official Plan amendmentzoning bylaw amendmentsite plan approvalplans of subdivisionvacant land plan of condominiumcommittee of adjustment (only if requested by applicant or staff)
We also require a pre-submission consultation if you want to change an existing development.
During this meeting, we will identify any studies and reports that you may need to include in your application(s) and discuss other relevant information.
Request a consultation
You need to apply for a pre-submission consultation.
Download the application form
Along with your completed application, you need:
digital copy of a key map (PDF) showing the extent and boundaries of the lands affecteddigital copy of draft concept plan (PDF) to scale in metric, showing the proposed developmentscanned copies of cheque payments (payable to the City of Kitchener) for applicable fees
When your documents are ready,send your application to staff by email. If your attachments are larger than 10MB, ask for a link to ShareFile in your email.
Send us an emailif you need access to ShareFile to upload your application.
As soon as possible after sending us your application virtually, please send the original, signed application form, key map, draft concept plan and cheque(s) to:
Attn: Manager of Development Review200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4V6


Title: View our Site plans page
About site plans
For major projects, we ask for a site plan to make sure you consider these aspects before starting development:
building massing, conceptual design and locationon-site amenities, landscaping and lightingdriveways, vehicle circulation and parkingsustainability featuresgrading and stormwater managementsewer and water lines
Depending on your project, you may need to give us a site plan.
When you need a site plan
You need to complete the site plan process for these projects:
constructing a new building or additionundertaking major renovations that increase the size or usability of a buildingcreating a commercial parking lotmaking alterations to an already approved site plan
When you don’t need a site plan
You don’t need to give us a site plan for these projects:
a residential building on a parcel of land containing a total of 10 residential units or lessfarm building
For these projects, you may still need abuilding permitorsite alteration permit.
Site plan application
There are three types of site plan applications:
Full Site Plan: new buildings or structures, major additions, major building renovations or a commercial parking facilityStamp Plan A: minor additions to an existing building, renovations that add new units to a building and include minor site works and temporary sales centresStamp Plan B: minor housekeeping or as-built revisions to an approved site plan (example: red-line revisions) or building conversions that need minimal site works
How to submit a site plan applicationWe require apre-submission consultationfor Full Site Plan applications and some Stamp Plan A applications. Call us at 519-741-2426 or send us an email to confirm if you need to request a consultation.After your consultation, follow these steps to complete the application:Internet-connected device and printer.Download the application formChoose the application form that fits your project:Full Site PlanStamp Plan AStamp Plan B and Confirmation LetterSend the application by emailSend the completed application form and any attachments, including a scan of the cheque, to usbyemail.If your application is larger than 10 MB, pleasecontact usto arrange for a file transfer.Mail or courier the application to City HallThe original, signed application form and cheque should be couriered as soon as possible after sending your application by email.Send applications to:City of KitchenerManager of Development Review - Planning division200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4R6
Application and approval process
Site plan application and approval processWe’ve outlined our site plan application process below.If you have any questions,send us an emailor call 519-741-2426.Internet-connected device and printer.Pre-submission consultationrequest apre-submission consultationif necessaryduring this meeting, we’ll share information that will help with your specific applicationSite plan applicationyou prepare a complete site plan application andsend your application to staffStaff reviewwe circulate your application to internal staff and agenciesstaff share comments with youif required, review includes a Site Plan Reviewing Committee meeting within 30 days of applicationConditional approvalif appropriate, we’ll approve your application with conditionsbefore final approval, you’ll need to meet those conditionsApplicant meets conditionsyou’ll submit the plans, studies and reports outlined in your conditional approvalstaff will review your documents and share their clearance with planning staffat this stage, you can start applying for building permits, but we won’t issue them until you get final approval (step 7 in this process)Final approvalafter all conditions are cleared and you have paid any site securities or fees, we will issue final approvalthe development agreement (if applicable) will be registered on the title of the propertyBuilding permits can be issuedbuilding staff usually review permits and share the status within:10 business days: renovation or new construction of a house where no dwelling unit is above another dwelling unit, a detached structure that serves a house and does not exceed 55 m² in building area and tents.15 business days: renovation or new construction of a building smaller than 600m² or three storeys20 business days: buildings larger than 600m²30 business days: post-disaster buildings and building classified as a high buildingwe issue building permits after a site plan gets final approval from staffLearn more aboutbuilding permitsand theapplication process.Construction begins!you can now start construction on your projectInspections and certificationsCertificationsyou must submit consultant certifications that the site has been constructed per approved plans to planning and engineering staff by emailstaff review your certifications within 15-30 daysInspectionsengineering and planning staff will conduct their on-site inspections based on the certifications and will provide you with a list of deficiencies if the site does not match approved plansafter your certifications are approved and confirmed through staff inspections, we release your site securitiesSchedule inspectionsschedule your building inspections onlineschedule off-site inspections (contact your plan approver)Site completionall inspections are completeall monies are returnedyou must maintain the property per the approved plans in your development agreement
Resources
These resources will help you through the different stages of the site plan application process.
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call 519-741-2426.
Designing your site
official planzoning bylawdevelopment manualurban design manualheritage permits and guidelinesemergency service policytree management policy
Clearing conditions
list of conditions for site plan approvalexample Section 41 agreement
On-site works cost estimate for site securities and plan review fees
on-site works cost estimate (Excel file)performance securities for site development works
Inspections and certifications
Your hired consultants must complete certification forms after the site has been constructed in order to start the process to release site securities.
professional engineer or consultantlandscape architect or designerlighting engineer or consultantnoise study engineer or consultantCPTED consultantheritage consultant (contact staff for more information)
General policies
parkland dedication policytelecommunication tower and antenna
Digital submission resources
standard title block filesite plan title block instructionsparkland dedication plan template


Title: View our Volunteer opportunities page
Current opportunities
Golf Fore Life volunteer caddyHelp support golfers living with dementia continue to play a game they love.Assist golfer one on one or in a foursome either by walking or driving a cart for 9 holes of golf, and assist them at the driving range and pitch and putt.Practical knowledge of golf (how to play, golf etiquette) is requiredExperience or an interest in supporting someone with dementia18 years or olderTuesday and/or Thursday mornings 9-11:30 a.m.13 weeks starting June 18.Please note as part of the screening process applicants will be required to provide 2 non-family members references and a vulnerable police records check.Apply onlineBike Kitchener BikeCheck volunteerBike Kitchener'sBikecheck- it's like a coat check, only for your bike!Provide a positive custoemer experience for residents by assisting them at checking their bike at eventsAssist at various events starting May until October2 to 3 hour shiftsMinimum age to volunteer 15 years or olderApply online
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call 519-741-2200, ext. 7537.
Youth volunteer opportunities
Do you know a young person looking for volunteer hours? Check out these opportunities:
check out ourcurrent volunteer opportunitiesto see if any postings fit with your interests and availabilityBuilding Youth Leadership Development(BYLD) gives young people aged 12 to 15 the opportunity to learn leadership skills, responsibility and self-confidenceKitchener Youth Crewgives kids aged 12 to 17 a chance to help out at youth drop-in programs at their local community centreKitchener Youth Action Council(KYAC) is for young people aged 14 and 24 who want to make a positive difference in the community
For any questions about BYLD, Youth Crew or KYAC, pleasesend us an email.
Organize a community clean-up
Organize your own community clean-up of a local park, public space, or trail. If your clean-up is in April,register onlineto get free supplies from your localcommunity centre!
Community clean-ups bring people together for a common cause: cleaning up our community. They provide an opportunity to see how a small act for a short time can have a great impact. When people get involved in cleaning their neighbourhoods, parks and open spaces, they are less likely to litter and more likely to keep it clean.
Brighten the day for your neighbours
Consider simple ways you can make a positive contribution to your neighbourhood, like:
helping neighbours bring in their trash or recycling binsdropping off positive cards or notesarranging to have a meal delivered to someone’s homekeeping your property neat and attractiverecognize a garden that you think makes Kitchener a greener, more vibrant or sustainable place to live by submitting the address for aKitchener in Bloom award
Get more involved in your neighbourhood
Check out theWhat's in my Neighbourhood? map, reach out to a nearbycommunity centreto find out whichneighbourhood associationis active in your area and ask if they’re looking for volunteers, or take some time to connect with your neighbour and start planning a neighbourhood project with the help of aneighourhood liaison.
You could also get to know your neighbours better by organizing a virtual, or outdoor gathering.
Other ways to make an impact
Open the accordions below to find other ways to make a positive impact in your community.
Donate items you no longer need or useAs a household, sort through toys, books, clothes, linens, and other items from your home. Local organizations that will accept clean items in good repair includeThrift on KentandWorth a Second Look. If you want to share your books with others in your neighbourhood, consider placing them in aLittle Library.Donate items to a local organizationMany agencies and community organizations keep yearly or seasonal wish lists of products and items that help their clients in their daily lives or just help the agency to run more smoothly, for example:oneROOFHouse of FriendshipMonica Place for Pregnant and Parenting YouthYW Emergency ShelterThe Kitchener Waterloo Humane SocietyDonate food and pantry items to a community fridge“Take what you need. Leave what you can.”Did you knowCommunity Fridge KWis accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week outside theKitchener Market(300 King Street East, Kitchener)? Donations of fresh produce and non-perishable food items can be dropped off, or picked up, anytime.519 Nourish Community Fridgeis also accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week at 150 Roger Street in Waterloo.Recognize a deserving neighbourDo you have a good neighbour? Nominate them for theGood Neighbour recognition programso they know their efforts are appreciated! You can nominate a Kitchener resident, group, business, or organization who makes your neighbourhood a better place to live. You will receive a thank you card signed by the mayor and a member of council to give to your neighbour. Nominees will also be entered into a bi-monthly draw to win great prizes. Find information about other City of Kitchener awards and recognition opportunitieson our website.
Volunteer with a local agency
If you’re looking to make a positive impact over a longer period of time, you may want to consider volunteering to help a local organization. Visit theVolunteer Waterloo Region websiteto see what in-person and virtual volunteer opportunities are available.


Title: View our Website policy page
Purpose
To establish the parameters under which the city will post content from a third-party organization on any of its municipally owned and operated websites.
Scope
This policy applies to any website owned and operated by the City of Kitchener:
www.kitchener.caMyKitchener portalwww.kitchenermarket.cawww.kitchenercemeteries.cawww.kitchenerutilities.cawww.theaud.cawww.kitchenergolf.cawww.engagekitchener.ca
Policy content
Posting external links
The City of Kitchener will consider posting external links on its websites if the link is directed to the website of:
An official government website (municipal, regional, provincial, federal).A government-funded agency or board.A City of Kitchener affiliated organization.An organization receiving a City of Kitchener community grant (Tier One or Tier Two).Service clubs operating in the City of Kitchener who perform service work that benefits Kitchener residents.A charitable organization with a registered charitable number and operating within the City of Kitchener.A business improvement area.A major community tourist attraction as determined solely by the City of Kitchener.A professional association.A business, organization or association with an agreement under the Municipal Partnership Program.A company that has tendered to do with the city.Artist-in-residence, and artists commissioned by the City of Kitchener to create and/or display public art.Regulatory authorities (e.g. Ontario Energy Board, TSSA)
The city will not consider posting external links on its websites to:
Personal websites.Business websites that are not part of an advertising agreement with the city.Political parties (unless as part of an advertising agreement as per the regulations of the city's municipal advertising policy).
Notwithstanding the criteria listed above, the city reserves the right to post, or refuse to post any external links on its website or to delete links already posted on its site at any time, without notice.
Removing external links
External links will be removed by the city without notice if, but not limited to, any of the following conditions apply:
The site's original information has been altered and the context of the information has changed;The site no longer meets the conditions listed above for acceptable external links;In the city's sole opinion, the information on the site becomes inaccurate and/or not trustworthy;Page formatting, lengthy download items or intrusive advertising make accessing information difficult;The link returns a "not found" error for more than 72 hours;The link promotes, exhibits, illustrates or manifests hate or obscene/pornographic/sexual content of any kind;The site and content does not comply with municipal, provincial or federal legislation.
Requesting an external link
Requests to add an external link to the city's website, according to the criteria listed above, are to be submitted by email for consideration.
External link policy enforcement
All sites may be reviewed by city staff to ensure that, in the sole opinion and discretion of the city, they meet and are in keeping with the above criteria.
Enforcement of the above linking policy and the decision on whether or not to add, remove or deny an external link on the city's website will be made by the manager of corporate communications, in consultation with the director of corporate communications and marketing, or his/her designate.
Community calendar postings
City of Kitchener staff will post information regarding activities, programs, meetings, events and festivals organized by the city and its Enterprises on its website calendar. The city reserves the right to post any additional events to its website calendar it deems to be in the community's interest.
Criteria for publishing events on the community calendar
Members of the public may submit event information for inclusion on the city's website calendar if that event is open to the general public, occurs within the boundaries of the Region of Waterloo and meets one of the following criteria:
Organized or funded by another order of government.Organized by a government-funded agency or board.Organized by a City of Kitchener affiliated group.Organized by an organization identified as eligible for a City of Kitchener community grant (Tier One or Tier Two).Funded in full, or in part, by the City of Kitchener.Sponsored by the City of Kitchener.Organized by a charitable organization with a registered charitable number and operating within the City of Kitchener.Organized by a service club operating within the City of Kitchener performing work that benefits Kitchener residents.Organized by a business improvement area for general promotional purposes.Located in a facility owned or leased by the City of Kitchener.
Events submitted by the public will not be published on the city's website calendar if they:
Are commercial in nature and, in the city's sole opinion, are attempting to advertise, promote or sell products or services of an individual or an individual business.Promote, exhibit, illustrate or manifest hate or obscene / pornographic / sexual content of any kind.Do not comply with municipal, provincial or federal legislation.Promote an individual religion or religious service.Events deemed by the city to be political in nature will not be posted after the writ has been dropped for a federal or provincial election, or after the first day of a municipal election year.Notwithstanding the criteria listed above, the city reserves the right to post, refuse to post, or remove, any event from its website calendar at any time, without notice.
Submitting an event to the community calendar
Requests from a member of the public to add an event to the city's website calendar must be submitted directly through the calendar itself.
To be considered for publication, an event submission must be accompanied by a name and contact information of an individual from the event organizing committee. Anonymous postings of events will not be published.
Policy enforcement of community calendar
All events submitted by a member of the public for publication on the city's website calendar will be reviewed by city staff to ensure that, in the sole opinion and discretion of the City of Kitchener, the event meets or is in keeping with the intent of the above criteria.
Decisions on whether or not to add, remove or deny the posting of an event to the city's website calendar will be made by the city's manager of corporate communications, in consultation with the director of corporate communications and marketing, or his/her designate.
Disclaimer
The City of Kitchener does not endorse or make any representation or warranty, expressed or implied, concerning the accuracy, quality or reliability of information contained on externally linked websites or posted on its community calendar that has been submitted by a member of the public.
Advertising
All advertisements placed on a municipally owned and operated website must comply with the city's municipal advertising policy.


Title: Building and renovating
Quick Links
Residential building permitsGet a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
When you need a building permitFind out when you need to apply for a building permit for your project.
Committee of AdjustmentApplication process and meeting schedule for our committee of adjustment.
Your home and propertyProperty standards, encroachment issues and information about termites.
Additional dwelling unitsLearn about the process for additional dwelling units, including tiny homes and basement apartments.
Residential dwelling unitsYou can build up to 10 total residential dwelling units on a residential property.
Backyard pools and hot tubsYou may need a permit for your pool or hot tub, depending on its size.
Heritage permits and guidelinesApply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Driveway wideningGet a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.
Building requestsFile a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.
Residential building permits
Get a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
When you need a building permit
Find out when you need to apply for a building permit for your project.
Committee of Adjustment
Application process and meeting schedule for our committee of adjustment.
Your home and property
Property standards, encroachment issues and information about termites.
Additional dwelling units
Learn about the process for additional dwelling units, including tiny homes and basement apartments.
Residential dwelling units
You can build up to 10 total residential dwelling units on a residential property.
Backyard pools and hot tubs
You may need a permit for your pool or hot tub, depending on its size.
Heritage permits and guidelines
Apply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Driveway widening
Get a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.
Building requests
File a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.


Title: View our Building requests page
File a building complaint
If you’re concerned about someone in your neighbourhood building without a permit or know of an unsafe building,file a complaint.
In your complaint, please include:
detailed description of the complaintcomplete and correct address (use Google Maps to confirm if needed)
Our staff will investigate if a building inspector needs to investigate in person. If the address included in your complaint is not correct, we may not be able to investigate the issue.
All complaints will remain confidential following the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act.
Grading issues
Grading issues could include water pooling for several days due to grading changes in your area, or extra water run-off from a neighbour’s yard.
Depending on the soil on your property, it can take a couple of days for the water from a heavy rain fall or snow melting to absorb into the ground. This is natural and is not a reason to file a grading complaint.
If there is water draining directly onto your property from your neighbour's eavestroughs, downspouts or sump pump, please call519-741-2345.
File a grading complaint
If you’re concerned about grading that affects your property,file a complaint.
Our staff will investigate and figure out if a building inspector needs to investigate in person. If the address included in your complaint is not correct, we may not be able to investigate the issue.
Grading complaints are a civil matter. A building inspector may go to the site and suggest a solution, but any decision you make is at your own discretion and cost.
Request a property survey or building plan
You can submit a Freedom of Information Act request to access a copy of any of these documents:
property surveysite planbuilding permit planother records
For each request, we charge a $12.50 fee. If your request involves any copying, research or extra preparation, extra charges may apply.
Submit a request online
Learn more aboutfreedom of information requests.


Title: Volunteer opportunities
Current opportunities
Golf Fore Life volunteer caddyHelp support golfers living with dementia continue to play a game they love.Assist golfer one on one or in a foursome either by walking or driving a cart for 9 holes of golf, and assist them at the driving range and pitch and putt.Practical knowledge of golf (how to play, golf etiquette) is requiredExperience or an interest in supporting someone with dementia18 years or olderTuesday and/or Thursday mornings 9-11:30 a.m.13 weeks starting June 18.Please note as part of the screening process applicants will be required to provide 2 non-family members references and a vulnerable police records check.Apply onlineBike Kitchener BikeCheck volunteerBike Kitchener'sBikecheck- it's like a coat check, only for your bike!Provide a positive custoemer experience for residents by assisting them at checking their bike at eventsAssist at various events starting May until October2 to 3 hour shiftsMinimum age to volunteer 15 years or olderApply online
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call 519-741-2200, ext. 7537.
Youth volunteer opportunities
Do you know a young person looking for volunteer hours? Check out these opportunities:
check out ourcurrent volunteer opportunitiesto see if any postings fit with your interests and availabilityBuilding Youth Leadership Development(BYLD) gives young people aged 12 to 15 the opportunity to learn leadership skills, responsibility and self-confidenceKitchener Youth Crewgives kids aged 12 to 17 a chance to help out at youth drop-in programs at their local community centreKitchener Youth Action Council(KYAC) is for young people aged 14 and 24 who want to make a positive difference in the community
For any questions about BYLD, Youth Crew or KYAC, pleasesend us an email.
Organize a community clean-up
Organize your own community clean-up of a local park, public space, or trail. If your clean-up is in April,register onlineto get free supplies from your localcommunity centre!
Community clean-ups bring people together for a common cause: cleaning up our community. They provide an opportunity to see how a small act for a short time can have a great impact. When people get involved in cleaning their neighbourhoods, parks and open spaces, they are less likely to litter and more likely to keep it clean.
Brighten the day for your neighbours
Consider simple ways you can make a positive contribution to your neighbourhood, like:
helping neighbours bring in their trash or recycling binsdropping off positive cards or notesarranging to have a meal delivered to someone’s homekeeping your property neat and attractiverecognize a garden that you think makes Kitchener a greener, more vibrant or sustainable place to live by submitting the address for aKitchener in Bloom award
Get more involved in your neighbourhood
Check out theWhat's in my Neighbourhood? map, reach out to a nearbycommunity centreto find out whichneighbourhood associationis active in your area and ask if they’re looking for volunteers, or take some time to connect with your neighbour and start planning a neighbourhood project with the help of aneighourhood liaison.
You could also get to know your neighbours better by organizing a virtual, or outdoor gathering.
Other ways to make an impact
Open the accordions below to find other ways to make a positive impact in your community.
Donate items you no longer need or useAs a household, sort through toys, books, clothes, linens, and other items from your home. Local organizations that will accept clean items in good repair includeThrift on KentandWorth a Second Look. If you want to share your books with others in your neighbourhood, consider placing them in aLittle Library.Donate items to a local organizationMany agencies and community organizations keep yearly or seasonal wish lists of products and items that help their clients in their daily lives or just help the agency to run more smoothly, for example:oneROOFHouse of FriendshipMonica Place for Pregnant and Parenting YouthYW Emergency ShelterThe Kitchener Waterloo Humane SocietyDonate food and pantry items to a community fridge“Take what you need. Leave what you can.”Did you knowCommunity Fridge KWis accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week outside theKitchener Market(300 King Street East, Kitchener)? Donations of fresh produce and non-perishable food items can be dropped off, or picked up, anytime.519 Nourish Community Fridgeis also accessible 24 hours a day, seven days a week at 150 Roger Street in Waterloo.Recognize a deserving neighbourDo you have a good neighbour? Nominate them for theGood Neighbour recognition programso they know their efforts are appreciated! You can nominate a Kitchener resident, group, business, or organization who makes your neighbourhood a better place to live. You will receive a thank you card signed by the mayor and a member of council to give to your neighbour. Nominees will also be entered into a bi-monthly draw to win great prizes. Find information about other City of Kitchener awards and recognition opportunitieson our website.
Volunteer with a local agency
If you’re looking to make a positive impact over a longer period of time, you may want to consider volunteering to help a local organization. Visit theVolunteer Waterloo Region websiteto see what in-person and virtual volunteer opportunities are available.


Title: View our Understanding your property taxes page
Components of your tax bill
Property taxes - comprised of residential, commercial, industrial and other tax classes - are our main source of revenue. They allow us to provide the important municipal programs and services you value and expect.
Your property tax bill is made up of three main components:
Municipal taxes: The tax rate to cover the costs of supplying municipal services is based on city council's adoption of our annual budget. Revenues from provincial grants, user fees and other sources are deducted from the total expenditures, resulting in a final amount that needs to be raised through taxation.Regional taxes: These taxes are based on the tax rate adopted by the Region of Waterloo. This portion is remitted to the Region to support their role in supplying various services including public transit, waste management, housing and shelter and public health and emergency services.Education taxes: This tax rate is set by the Province of Ontario and remitted to the local school board you support.
Municipal taxes pay for services that make Kitchener a great place to live, work and play.
Tax rates
Use the links below to see detailed tax breakdowns from the past four years:
2024 tax rates2023 tax rates2022 tax rates2021 tax rates
Visit ourbudget pageto see current and past years’ budgets.
Due dates
Find tax due dates on ourpaying your taxes page.
Property tax calculator
Calculate the property taxes for your home using this tool:
Paying your taxes
Visit ourpaying your taxes pagefor the different payment methods you can use.
Moving
If you are buying a new home or selling your home, call us at 519-741-2450. We will need the following information:
Property address and roll numberLegal closing dateFull legal names of all those on titleContact information including home, business and cell numbersMailing instructionsName of the lawyer acting on your behalf


Title: View our Standard details and guides page
Building permit details
These standard building details can help you in your permit application and construction process.
9-3 - deck details9-3c – deck elevations9-4 - detached garage and shed - floating slab9-6 - detached garage and shed - cross-section9-7 - detached garage and shed - mud sill anchorage9-8 - carport details9-9 - French drain9-13 - exterior basement stair details9-14 - party wall details9-15 - exterior wall fire resistance rating details9-16 - vaulted ceiling collar tie details9-17 - basement egress window details9-17a - means of escape window9-18a - SB-12 energy efficiency - basement wall insulation9-19 - fire protection around gas and electric cooktops9-20 to 9-25 - wall sections
Barrier-free details
barrier-free - washroom detailsbarrier-free - shower detailsbarrier-free - ramp detailsbarrier-free - stud wall reinforcing details
Infiltration galleries
infiltration gallery detail
Guide documents
average grade calculator guideecology units guidestandpipe - protection of above ground piping guidefire load calculation guideportable fire extinguishers guide


Title: View our Leaf collection page
Leaf collection options
Watch the video below to learn about your leaf collection options:
Mulching and composting
Leaves still have lots of value to offer the environment after they fall. Dry leaves are a carbon-rich ingredient for your compost pile that you can re-use to enrich your garden and soil.
Here’s what you can do to re-use leaves at home:
empty your lawn mower’s bagging unit and mowing it over again creates a mulch to fertilize your lawnrake whole leaves onto your garden beds to feed earthworms and promote growthwait until the ground freezes before mulching, this keeps soil frozen during mild spells, protecting your plantsadd dry leaves to your compost pile – alternate layers of leaves and kitchen wastelearn more from theComposting Council of Canada
Yard waste
You can use theRegion of Waterloo bagged yard waste programfor your leaves. Check your neighbourhood schedule for when your yard waste collection week is.
Leaf drop-off sites
We operate eight leaf drop-off sites. Drop off sites are in neighbourhoods across Kitchener and will be open seven days a week during daylight hours from Friday, October 13 to Friday, December 8.
Our drop-off sites are:
Schaefer Park- Bloomingdale RoadBreithaupt Park- Kinsman Park, off Union StreetKitchener Auditorium- Ottawa Street North entranceMeinzinger Park Soccer Fields- Homer Watson BoulevardLions Arena- Rittenhouse RoadUpper Canada Park- Pioneer DriveCherry Park- Strange Street and Waverly RoadHofstetter Park- 40 Hofstetter Ave.
Drop-off sites are for leaves only (no yard or household waste). The following guidelines apply to these sites:
if you are using bags to transport your leaves to a drop off site, empty your leaves loose and take your bags with you. No bags, including paper yard waste bags will be accepted at the drop off sites.any other materials left at drop off locations are considered illegal dumping and will be subject to a fine. City staff will monitor the drop off sites and take a zero-tolerance approach with offenderscommercial haulers are not permitted on the leaf drop off sites
Curbside collection
We collect loose leaves in neighbourhoods with significant tree cover on aset schedule. Just like garbage collection, each neighbourhood has a designated week for pick-up.
Check ourleaf collection scheduleto find your collection options and pick-up dates.
When raking leaves to the road for curbside collection, please:
don’t rake your leaves to the road any earlier then the weekend before your collection date. If raking earlier, only rake leaves to the boulevard or your lawn and move them onto the street on your collection dateensure leaves are raked out before 7 a.m. on your collection datenever rake leaves onto a storm drain. Storm drains drain stormwater and prevent flooding.
The curbside collection schedule is based on weather conditions. Historically, winter conditions including freezing temperatures and snow fall happens in December, so leaf collection is scheduled in November. Snow fall makes raking and leaf collection more challenging for residents and staff.
If more leaves have fallen after your scheduled collection week, you can use our leaf drop-off sites until December 10 or the Region’syard waste program.
Keep streets safe and prevent flooding
Please do not rake or blow leaves onto:
storm drainssidewalksbike lanes
Raking or blowing leaves onto the street or sidewalk can create a safety hazard for pedestrians and cyclists and can cause flooding if a storm drain is blocked.
If you see a blocked storm drain, call519-741-2345.


Title: View our Overnight parking exemptions page
Parking exemptions
To park in a legal parking spot on a street overnight between December 1 and March 31, you must request a parking exemption.
What you need to know about parking exemptions:
parking overnight means parking between 2:30 a.m. and 6 a.m.each licence plate is allowed five exemptions each winter season (December 1 to March 31)if we cancel your request, it will not count towards your limit of five exemptionsyou must request a parking exemption before 2 a.m.
Between April 1 and November 30, you do not need a parking exemption to park in a legal parking spot overnight. Otherbylawsapply.
Request an exemption
Fill out our online form to request a parking exemption. If you have any questions, call us at 519-741-2345.
Request a parking exemption
Snow events
If we declare a snow event, we cancel exemptions and you must move your vehicle. Cancelled exemptions will not count towards your limit of five exemptions for the year.
Street parking bylaws
Even with an exemption, you must park in a legal parking spot. If you park illegally with an exemption, you may get aparking ticket.
Visit ourparking bylaws pageto learn about street parking bylaws.
Vehicles not eligible for an exemption
We do not give parking exemptions to:
vehicles over 4.5 metric tonnesunlicensed vehiclesrecreational vehiclestrailers


Title: View our Rockway Golf Course page
Contact information
Address:625 Rockway Drive, Kitchener, Ontario
Phone number: 519-741-2949
Championship 18-hole course
This 18-hole, par 70 course was designed by Stanley Thompson. Built in 1935, Rockway remains one of the finest public golf courses in Ontario.
Course details5,520 yard course.Par 70 for men, par 71 for women.Course rating/slope for men112/66.565.0/109Course rating/slope for women70.3/10969.1/10768.0/106
Clubhouse
Visit theclubhouseto find:
the Snack Shackour pro shopchangerooms
Rentals
You can rent rooms at Rockway Golf Course for meetings or events. Tables and chairs are included in the room rental rate.Meeting Room – seating capacity 20 people – $123 half day or $202 full day, including HSTBanquet Room – seating capacity 120 people – $615 half day or $935 full day, including HSTDepending on the nature of your event other rental costs can include:Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensingIf you're interested in booking this facility or getting a more detailed quote, pleasecomplete the inquiry formto tell us more about your event. Staff will confirm the details of your event with you before finalizing the booking.
Guidelines
Please follow these guidelines and rules when you're coming to a Kitchener Golf course:A valid credit card is required when making a booking. When a player fails to show up for a tee time, this negatively impacts the operation of the clubs and the experience of other players. A no show fee will be charged in the event that a player does not show up and does not contact the club to cancel at least 4 hours before a confirmed tee time (a “no show”). A no show fee in an amount equivalent to the green fee that would have applied to the round will be charged to either the no show player’s credit card or to the credit card on file for the player who booked the tee time for the no show player.Arrive to the course no later than 20 minutes before your tee-time.Pace of play is important to everyone. Be respectful of the other golfers and manage your pace of play appropriately.Replace your divots, rake the bunkers behind you and repair ball marks on the greens with either a ball mark tool or a tee.Every player must have their own bag and clubs. Rental clubs are available through the pro shop.Course closes at dark, please ensure all rental carts are returned before dark.Dress code: golfers must be properly attired at all times on premises, including the clubhouse.Men must wear shirts with sleeves.Ladies must wear clothing that covers their midriff.Cut-off shorts or jeans with holes are not permitted.Only Golf shoes or any other flat athletic shoes are permitted. Metal spikes or sport cleats are prohibited.To serve our customers better we ask that you provide both a phone number and email address on or prior to checking in for your round.No outside alcohol is permitted on the golf course property. We reserve the right to inspect all coolers and golf bags. Possession of alcohol, other than that purchased from this establishment, is against the law. You will be asked to surrender any unauthorized alcohol or to leave the premises.Single riders must pair up. Maximum two carts per group.To save time, you can check-in or pay for your round through our Kitchener Golf app.Each player will abide by and comply with the facility rules and guidelines (posted on scorecard and/or facility signs), as established and updated by the City from time to time, including but not limited to any rules and guidelines relating to public health.


Title: View our Heritage properties and districts page
Heritage designation
The Ontario Heritage Act allows us to designate:
all or part of a neighbourhood as a heritage conservation districtindividual properties
This designation is done under Part IV (individual) or Part V (heritage conservation districts) of the Ontario Heritage Act.
District designation
When we designate a heritage conservation district, this allows us to work on conserving and enhancing its unique character. There are fourheritage districts in Kitchener.
This process involves preparing and adopting a heritage conservation district plan, which gives guidance to the property owners and us on how to protect and preserve the heritage of the district.
An area is designated under Part V (heritage conservation districts) of the Ontario Heritage Act and placed on theMunicipal Heritage Registerfollowing:
completion of a heritage studyconsultation with both the Heritage Kitchener committee and the property owner(s)preparation of a plan
Property designation
There are 133 individually designated heritage properties in Kitchener. All designated properties are listed on theMunicipal Heritage Register.
A designating bylaw is created for the property, which explains the reasons for the designation and lists the property’s heritage attributes.
Download ourguide to heritage designationto learn about individual property designation.
Heritage permits
You may need a heritage permit to make changes to your property if your property is:
an individually designated heritage propertyin a heritage conservation district
Review ourmunicipal heritage registerif you’re not sure of your property’s designation.
You can apply for a heritage permit in person or by mail.
Download the application form
If you have any questions, call us at 519-741-2426.
Application deadlines
Heritage Kitchenerreviews heritage permit applications at their meetings. Please use the dates in the table below to help plan for your application.
There are no Heritage Kitchener meetings in July or December 2024.
Application deadlineHeritage Kitchener meeting dateNovember 24, 2023January 9, 2024December 29, 2023February 6, 2024January 26, 2024March 5, 2024February 23, 2024April 2, 2024March 29, 2024May 7, 2024April 26, 2024June 4, 2024June 28, 2024August 6, 2024July 26, 2024September 3, 2024August 23, 2024October 1, 2024September 27, 2024November 5, 2024
Our heritage conservation districts
We have four heritage conservation districts:
St. Mary'sUpper DoonVictoria ParkCivic Centre
St. Mary’s
The St. Mary’sdistrict planprovides policies and guidelines to conserve the significant architecture and suburban landscapes unique to the post World War II housing character associated with the area.
Upper Doon
The Upper Doon district plan contains policies and guidelines to conserve the architecture and landscapes unique to the rural character associated with the former village of Doon.
To access a copy of the Upper Doon district plan, pleasesend us an email.
Victoria Park
The Victoria Parkdistrict plancontains guidelines and policies aimed at conserving the significant Victorian architecture and romantic landscapes that are unique to the Victoria Park neighbourhood. Aself-guided tour of the Victoria Park heritage conservation districtis available, if you're interested in learning more about this historic community.
Civic Centre
The Civic Centredistrict plancontains guidelines and policies to protect and conserve the Civic Centre neighbourhood. This unique neighbourhood is linked to several key periods in our city's development, and contains many buildings associated with community leaders.
Heritage district rules
Designated properties within a heritage conservation district are subject to a designating bylaw, which identifies the boundary and adopts the heritage conservation district plan's policies and guidelines for change within the area.
Owners of property designated under the Ontario Heritage Act within a heritage conservation district may require a heritage permitto make changes to either the building or the property in question.
Vacant buildings and structures on properties within a heritage conservation district that are listed on the Municipal Heritage Register are subject to the heritage provisions of the property standards bylaw.
Non-designated heritage properties
These properties have cultural heritage value and can be placed on theMunicipal Heritage Register.
What being on the register means
60 days to consider demolition applications instead of the usual 10Planning Act applications may require a heritage impact assessment or conservation planvacant buildings are subject to the heritage provisions of ourproperty standards bylaw
What being on the register doesn’t mean
Unlike with designated properties, this would not:
provide protection under the Ontario Heritage Actrequire heritage approvals for work on the property
Being added to the register
The process to be added to the register is:
initial evaluationconsultation with ownerreview by Heritage Kitchenercouncil consideration


Title: View our 2019-2022 Strategic Plan progress page
People-friendly transportation
Our goal is to transform how people move through the city by making the transportation network safe, convenient, comfortable and connected.
ActionTarget completionStatusBudgetComplete StreetsFind information on ourtransportation projects page.2019CompleteWithin budgetBikeshare programFind information in thismedia releaseand on oure-scooters page.2023CompleteWithin budgetProtected cycling networkFind information on ourbike infrastructure page.2024In progress (delayed)Within budgetCycling and Trails Master PlanFind information on ourCycling and Trails Master Plan page.2020CompleteWithin budgetPedestrian-first streetsFind information on Engage Kitchener:Gaukel StreetMarket district2023CompleteWithin budget
Environmental leadership
Our goal is to achieve a healthy and livable community by mitigating and adapting to climate change and by conserving natural resources.
ActionTarget completionStatusBudgetCorporate climate action planFind more information in ouraction plan document.2019CompleteWithin budgetEnergy Efficiency Reserve Fund2022CompleteWithin budgetCommunity Climate Action PlanFind more information on theClimate Action WR website.2020CompleteWithin budgetSustainable Urban Forest Strategy, tree canopy target and tree planting backlogFind more information in ourstrategy document.2022CompleteWithin budgetNew waste diversion programs2021CompleteWithin budget
Vibrant economy
Our goal is to build a vibrant city by making strategic investments to support job creation, economic prosperity, thriving arts and culture, and great places to live.
ActionTarget completionStatusBudgetUrban design manualFind more information on oururban design page.2019CompleteWithin budgetBuild-out of 44 Gaukel, Incubator, Accelerator and Co-Working Space NetworkFind more information on the44 Gaukel website.2023In progress (delayed)Within budgetMake It Kitchener 2.0 StrategyFind more information on theMake It Kitchener website.2020CompleteWithin budgetCity-owned property review2023In progress (delayed)Within budgetDowntown Vision, city-owned property brought to market, Innovation District (Bramm Yards) and Civic District master plans2023In progress (delayed)Within budget
Caring community
Our goal is to enhance people’s sense of belonging and connection by providing welcoming community spaces and programs; better engaging, serving and supporting our diverse populations and helping to make housing affordable.
ActionTarget completionStatusBudgetEquity, Diversity and Inclusion StrategyFind more information on ourCorporate Strategy on Equity and Anti-Racism page.2020CompleteWithin budgetAffordable Housing StrategyFind more information on ourHousing For All page.2020CompleteWithin budgetSupport for safe consumption and treatment servicesFind more information on theRegion of Waterloo's website.2019CompleteWithin budgetMill Courtland Community Centre expansion business case2020CompleteWithin budgetNew Rosenberg Community Centre/school business case2025In progressWithin budgetHuron Brigadoon area school/community centre construction2022CompleteWithin budgetOpen Space StrategyFind more information onEngage Kitchener.2023In progressWithin budgetArts and Culture Plan2023In progressWithin budget
Great customer service
Our goal is to increase people’s satisfaction, trust and engagement with the city by providing friendly, easy and convenient services.
ActionTarget completionStatusBudgetMulti-language interpretation support2020CompleteWithin budgetCustomer Satisfaction Program2020CompleteWithin budgetOnline customer service portal developmentFind more information on ourMyKitchener page.2021CompleteWithin budgetSet and communicate service levels2022CompleteWithin budgetCustomer Experience Program2022CompleteWithin budget


Title: View our Zoning occupancy certificate page
When you need a zoning certificate
A property owner or proposed new tenant needs a zoning certificate if they’re proposing to change:
the use of a commercial building (use as defined by the zoning bylaw)the previously approved gross floor area of a business or on a multi-unit residential lota fully residential dwelling to include a home-based businessthe number of residential units on a property up to 10 units (11 or more units will require asite plan)
Examples include:
if a restaurant is moving out and a pharmacy is taking its placewhen a business is increasing or decreasing the current size of its unit (example: expanding into an adjacent unit)opening a home-based business like a hair salon or artisanconverting a single detached home into a three-unit dwelling
This is a requirement under theOntario Planning Actand ourzoning bylaw.
Residential uses
You don’t need a zoning occupancy certificate to establish a residential use for:
single detached dwellingssemi-detached dwellingsduplexes
Apply
Download theapplication formfor a zoning certificate.
Mail or drop off the completed application and the applicable fee to:
Planning and housing policy division200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4V6
You can also send the applicationby email.
If you want to pay by credit card, please note that on the application form and include a phone number. We will call you to arrange payment over the phone when we process the certificate.
Depending on your proposed use, you may also need to include:
floor plan (for home businesses)survey (for new residential uses)zoning plan (drawings showing compliance to applicablezoning regulationsfor the proposed use)
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call519-741-2426.


Title: View our Bylaws and enforcement page
Quick Links
Bylaw guideCommon bylaws, including noise, parking, property standards and more.
Noise complaints and exemptionsLearn about our noise bylaw and how to file a noise complaint.
Bylaws at homeOur most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Parking bylawsOur parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Parking and non-parking ticketsPay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bylaws (municipal code)Our full municipal code, including links to our bylaw documents.
Pets and animalsDog licensing, backyard chickens, coyotes and urban wildlife.
Report a problemUse our online form to report a problem in your neighbourhood.
Report an illegal signIf you see a sign that doesn't comply with our sign bylaws, you can report it online.
Report pollutionYou can report pollution and environmental concerns to the province.
GraffitiReport graffiti you see in our community.
LitterIf you see litter in a city park, report it to make sure it gets cleaned up.
GuidesGuides related to bylaws and enforcement.
Bylaw guide
Common bylaws, including noise, parking, property standards and more.
Noise complaints and exemptions
Learn about our noise bylaw and how to file a noise complaint.
Bylaws at home
Our most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Parking bylaws
Our parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Parking and non-parking tickets
Pay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bylaws (municipal code)
Our full municipal code, including links to our bylaw documents.
Pets and animals
Dog licensing, backyard chickens, coyotes and urban wildlife.
Report a problem
Use our online form to report a problem in your neighbourhood.
Report an illegal sign
If you see a sign that doesn't comply with our sign bylaws, you can report it online.
Report pollution
You can report pollution and environmental concerns to the province.
Graffiti
Report graffiti you see in our community.
Litter
If you see litter in a city park, report it to make sure it gets cleaned up.
Guides
Guides related to bylaws and enforcement.


Title: View our Social services page
Quick Links
Cooling centresPlaces to cool down during the summer across the Region of Waterloo.
Warming centresPlaces to warm up during the winter across the Region of Waterloo
Kitchener Housing Inc.Our non-profit housing corporation specializes in affordable housing.
EncampmentsWith increased homelessness, there are more encampments in public places within the city.
Region of Waterloo community servicesServices offered by the Region of Waterloo, including child care and housing.
Cooling centres
Places to cool down during the summer across the Region of Waterloo.
Warming centres
Places to warm up during the winter across the Region of Waterloo
Kitchener Housing Inc.
Our non-profit housing corporation specializes in affordable housing.
Encampments
With increased homelessness, there are more encampments in public places within the city.
Region of Waterloo community services
Services offered by the Region of Waterloo, including child care and housing.


Title: View our Vision Zero page
Traffic collisions in Kitchener
More than 1,200 traffic collisions happen every year on Kitchener streets, causing more than 200 injuries. Over the past decade, there’s been an average of one death per year.
You may notice we use the term “collisions” rather than “accidents” to make an important point: these collisions do not happen by accident. There is always one or multiple causes of any collision. We’re committed to studying, innovating and educating ourselves about those causes so we can learn to prevent them.
High-risk driving doesn't make sense
Most of the traffic collisions in Kitchener involve one or more motor vehicles (examples: cars, trucks or motorcycles), which means our driving behaviours are very important.
Some common high-risk driving behaviours include:
aggressive drivingspeedingdistracted driving
Aggressive driving
An aggressive driver follows too closely, exceeds the speed limit, disobeys a traffic signal or fails to yield the right of way. These are all behaviours that a driver can choose to change.
Speeding
Have you ever seen someone speeding on a quiet residential street and wondered “how much time are they really saving?” The answer is not much.
Take an average trip to a grocery store, for example. Assuming the trip is about 5 km, the difference in travel time driving 50 km/h compared to 40 km/h is less than one minute. This example may not seem dramatic, but the difference could save a life.
If a vehicle travelling at 50 km/h is in a collision with a pedestrian, the survival rate for the pedestrian is about 15%. The survival rate increases to 70% when the vehicle is driving at 40 km/h and to 90% when driving at 30 km/h. This is whywe're lowering speed limits in residential neighbourhoods to 40 km/h and in school zones to 30 km/h.
Distracted driving
Distracted drivers are inattentive and can cause collisions. When you’re driving without distractions, your reaction time is typically between one and two seconds. If you’re texting, reading messages or otherwise distracted, your reaction time increases to three or four seconds. If you’re driving at 50 km/h, the extra two seconds add about 26 extra meters to come to a full stop.
Our strategy
We believe that no loss of life on our city streets is acceptable. We want to eliminate serious injuries and death due to traffic collisions. OurVision Zero strategyis a multi-year plan to get there by creating safer streets. By improving how we design our streets, enforce traffic laws and educate our road users, we will help to improve safety. This concept started in Sweden in 1997 and has become popular around the world.
Our strategy has five main components:
evaluationengineeringenforcementeducationengagement
Evaluation
We need continuous data-driven evaluation and analysis of the road network. This includes tracking the impact of safety efforts and understanding the causes behind traffic-related serious injuries and fatalities. Some ways we evaluate are through annual collision analysis and street network investigations to find the areas with a higher probability of a collision that can result in a serious injury or fatality.
Engineering
The design, operation and maintenance of our transportation network can significantly impact the frequency and severity of collisions. We acknowledge the role of human error and aim to account for it. For example, dedicated infrastructure for vulnerable street users (like cyclists or pedestrians) or street narrowing/speed humps to reduce speeding are examples of engineering modifications to improve traffic safety for everyone.
Enforcement
Illegal driver behaviours, such as impaired driving, distracted driving and speeding, are major contributors to severe collisions. These high-risk behaviours can be reduced through different types of police enforcement and related programs. Considering the limited resources available, we work with the Waterloo Region Police Service to target the areas most in need of enforcement.
Automated Speed Enforcement units remind drivers to slow down in areas where children and other vulnerable road users are. The goal of using ASE is to reduce speeding and increase safety in school zones within the region. The Region of Waterloo leads this program. Visitthe region’s websiteto find more information.
Education
Increased awareness and education related to street safety are fundamental to all Vision Zero programs. We’ll work with our partners to use educational programs to target high-risk driving behaviours such as aggressive driving, speeding and distracted driving. We are also working with local school boards to increase awareness and education for students.
As a part of our Vision Zero education, we created an education campaign that supports the goal of the Vision Zero Strategy to reduce the number of serious injuries and death due to traffic collisions to zero in our community.
Traffic collisions are not accidents. They can be prevented.
We developed the videos below to promote awareness of the strategy and improve driving behaviour.
Engagement
The continuous involvement of communities and other stakeholders is key to a successful and effective Vision Zero program. Subscribe to ourEngage Kitchener pageto learn how to contribute ideas and identify your priorities for a Vision Zero action plan.
Staff reports
Read these staff reports to learn more about our Vision Zero approach:
Vision Zero Strategy - 2022 updateCity of Kitchener Vision Zero Strategy(November 2021)Vision Zero Review(February 2020)
Partners
We're working with these groups towards the common goal of reducing injuries and fatalities.
University of WaterlooWaterloo Regional Police ServiceRegion of Waterloo Public Health and Emergency ServicesStudent Transportation Services of Waterloo RegionCity of Waterloo
This collaboration has helped us use shared resources and expertise to improve street safety and align our efforts towards achieving Vision Zero.
Vision Zero dashboard
Visit ourVision Zero dashboardto find collision statistics and project updates.


Title: View our Active permits and interactive mapping page
Active building permits
See building permits at your fingertips with one of our tools:
online servicesactive building permits map on our data hub
We update this information every day. If you have any questions, call us at519-741-2312orsend us an email.
How to use our interactive mapping tool
Follow these steps to use the active building permit map on our interactive mapping tool:
launch the mapfind your location of interest by zooming in or searching using the search menuclick the “i” on the left side of the window to open the information toolchoose a property to see its permit information under “Building Permits – Current”
If more than one building permit exists for the property, you can scroll down in the pop-up window to see them.
Our map includes information from 1986 to today. You can change the layer to “Building Permits – Historic” in the map contents and on the pop-up window.
If you can’t find the permit you’re looking for, call us a519-741-2312.


Title: View our Doon Valley Golf Course page
Location
Address:500 Doon Valley Drive, Kitchener, Ontario
Phone number: 519-741-2949
Get directions
There is construction on Doon Valley Drive, scheduled to be complete in May 2024. Plan your route and check ourroad closures mapbefore leaving to avoid delays.
18-hole course
Doon Valley's 18-hole course offers a challenging layout amid expansive natural wetlands. Several holes on this mature course run alongside the Grand River. You may even see an occasional eagle as you attempt to score one of your own. Doon Valley is one of the most popular and affordable courses in southwestern Ontario.
Course detailsFour sets of tees ranging from 5,113 - 6,543 yards, Par 72.Course rating/slope for menBlack: 71.7./126Blue: 69.4/121White: 67.1/113Red: 64.8/102.Course rating/slope for womenRed: 69.8/116White: 72.5/125.
9-hole course
Players of all skill levels will enjoy this full-length 9-hole course. Doon Valley features some of the most scenic holes in Waterloo region. Those looking to enhance their game on an easy-to-walk course will not be disappointed.
Course detailsThree sets of tees ranging from 2,566 - 2,898 yards, Par 35.Course rating/slope for menBlue: 34.1/114White: 33.2/112Course rating/slope for womenRed: 34.3/114White: 35.6/122
Pitch & Putt
Whether you are new to the game or an experienced golfer wanting to improve your short game, Doon Valley's Pitch 'n Putt course is perfect for you. This 9-hole, short-yardage course features fewer hazards, making it ideal for children of all ages and those who want to try a simplified version of golf or practice iron accuracy. Daily rates and memberships are available.
Practice facility and driving range
Doon Valley's practice facility features a full-size driving range along with a large putting green with practice bunker. The driving range has flat, grass tees and excellent target greens at various distances. Being mostly surrounded by trees, the practice facility is a relaxing and peaceful atmosphere to practice your game. You can purchase a range basket at the pro shop.
The driving range is available on a first-come, first-served basis.
Clubhouse
Visit theclubhouseto find:
a full restaurant and barour pro shopchangerooms
Rentals
You can rent rooms at Doon Valley Golf Course for meetings or events. Tables and chairs are included in the room rental rate.Meeting Room – seating capacity 20 people – $123 half day or $202 full day, including HSTBanquet Room – seating capacity 120 people – $615 half day or $935 full day, including HSTDepending on the nature of your event other rental costs can include:Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensingIf you're interested in booking this facility or getting a more detailed quote, pleasecomplete the inquiry formto tell us more about your event. Staff will confirm the details of your event with you before finalizing the booking.
Guidelines
Please follow these guidelines and rules when you're coming to a Kitchener Golf course:A valid credit card is required when making a booking. When a player fails to show up for a tee time, this negatively impacts the operation of the clubs and the experience of other players. A no show fee will be charged in the event that a player does not show up and does not contact the club to cancel at least 4 hours before a confirmed tee time (a “no show”). A no show fee in an amount equivalent to the green fee that would have applied to the round will be charged to either the no show player’s credit card or to the credit card on file for the player who booked the tee time for the no show player.Arrive to the course no later than 20 minutes before your tee-time.Pace of play is important to everyone. Be respectful of the other golfers and manage your pace of play appropriately.Replace your divots, rake the bunkers behind you and repair ball marks on the greens with either a ball mark tool or a tee.Every player must have their own bag and clubs. Rental clubs are available through the pro shop.Course closes at dark, please ensure all rental carts are returned before dark.Dress code: golfers must be properly attired at all times on premises, including the clubhouse.Men must wear shirts with sleeves.Ladies must wear clothing that covers their midriff.Cut-off shorts or jeans with holes are not permitted.Only Golf shoes or any other flat athletic shoes are permitted. Metal spikes or sport cleats are prohibited.To serve our customers better we ask that you provide both a phone number and email address on or prior to checking in for your round.No outside alcohol is permitted on the golf course property. We reserve the right to inspect all coolers and golf bags. Possession of alcohol, other than that purchased from this establishment, is against the law. You will be asked to surrender any unauthorized alcohol or to leave the premises.Single riders must pair up. Maximum two carts per group.To save time, you can check-in or pay for your round through our Kitchener Golf app.Each player will abide by and comply with the facility rules and guidelines (posted on scorecard and/or facility signs), as established and updated by the City from time to time, including but not limited to any rules and guidelines relating to public health.


Title: View our Parks strategic plan page
Places & Spaces: An Open Space Strategy for Kitchener
Places & Spaces: An Open Space Strategy for Kitchener will be our new guiding strategic document for parks and open spaces in Kitchener.
Our guiding principle for this new strategy is: parks and open spaces are important spaces that help residents find their place. Download theFoundations documentto read more on the guiding principles, vision and values of the strategy.
The Places & Spaces strategy will focus on two main topics:
Spaces: where we have parks and where we need themPlaces: what we need in parks to support our residents and communities
Visit ourEngage Kitchener pageto learn more about the project and get involved.
Download these documents for more context:
FoundationsSpaces strategy
Spaces
TheSpaces strategy, the first part of Places & Spaces: A Parks and Open Space Strategy, sets out the vision for parkland, shaped by extensive community engagement, over the next two decades. It identifies the importance of local parks to community and sets a target of 10 square meters of local park per person across the city. The plan identifies nine critical needs communities, where we’ll look to add new parks over the coming years. The plan directs staff to:
work to secure up to 18 new parks in critical needs communities to support community access to local park spacework with partners like school boards and hydro companies to maximize shared opportunities to use open spaces for the public
As part of the plan, city council passed a newparkland dedication bylawthat includes:
removal of an exemption on all downtown development to pay parkland dedication as part of new developmentproviding a discount to developers who build and sustain supportive housing and affordable rental housingproviding support for developers to build public open spaces into new private developments
Staff will begin by looking for opportunities where new parks might be located, based on priorities in the plan, and will bring recommendations forward during the 2024 budget cycle for how city council can further support and fast-track securing parkland.
Places
Places will be the vision of parks in Kitchener. Places focuses on the quality of our parks for placemaking and creating diverse and functional spaces.
Places will explore a wide range of themes, including:
principles of design: equity, accessibilityenvironmental: habitat, stormwater and climate changespecific infrastructure planning: playgrounds, sportsfields, dog parks
Staff are working on Places now through exploration of each theme and opportunities to engage on each one along the way.
Subscribe to ourEngage Kitchener pageto get updates about surveys, events, idea boards and more.
Parks Strategic Plan (2010)
In 2010, we developed theParks Strategic Plan. This plan identified long-term objectives, priorities and strategies to deliver a system of parks and open spaces across Kitchener to serve the needs of our communities.
Through this plan, we laid out a network of neighbourhood parks, active parks and natural areas. These spaces are connected by community trails and the Grand River Corridor to support recreation and leisure for everyone in Kitchener.
The plan helps guide how we build parks and open spaces in new communities as Kitchener grows. Our goals are:
give residents access to a neighbourhood park or playground within 500m of their homeshave at least 1.5 hectares of parkland for every 1,000 residents
Parks Strategic PlanParks Strategic Plan mapsituational analysis report
Tell us what you think
Subscribe to this page to get an email when we add a new survey.


Title: View our Zoning (occupancy) certificate page
When you need a zoning certificate
A property owner or proposed new tenant needs a zoning certificate if they’re proposing to change:
the use of a commercial building (use as defined by the zoning bylaw)the previously approved gross floor area of a business or on a multi-unit residential lota fully residential dwelling to include a home-based businessthe number of residential units on a property up to 10 units (11 or more units will require asite plan)
Examples include:
if a restaurant is moving out and a pharmacy is taking its placewhen a business is increasing or decreasing the current size of its unit (example: expanding into an adjacent unit)opening a home-based business like a hair salon or artisanconverting a single detached home into a three-unit dwelling
This is a requirement under theOntario Planning Actand ourzoning bylaw.
Residential uses
You don’t need a zoning occupancy certificate to establish a residential use for:
single detached dwellingssemi-detached dwellingsduplexes
Apply
Download theapplication formfor a zoning certificate.
Mail or drop off the completed application and the applicable fee to:
Planning and housing policy division200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4V6
You can also send the applicationby email.
If you want to pay by credit card, please note that on the application form and include a phone number. We will call you to arrange payment over the phone when we process the certificate.
Depending on your proposed use, you may also need to include:
floor plan (for home businesses)survey (for new residential uses)zoning plan (drawings showing compliance to applicablezoning regulationsfor the proposed use)
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call519-741-2426.


Title: Open file in new window: Resources for builders and developers
Quick Links
Building and industry updatesCity updates for the building industry and our annual workshop presentations.
Building standardsEnsuring proposed developments are safe, structurally sound and follow codes.
Demolition controlWe control demolition of buildings to preserve residential units.
Development chargesFees we charge for developments in urban and suburban areas.
Development manualReference documents for developers and builders.
Grants and incentivesApply for a grant to save money on your project or other initiative.
Land development applicationsLinks to development resources to help with your project.
Planning around rapid transit (PARTS)How we're planning the areas around rapid transit stations.
Park dedicationWe ask for land or cash-in-lieu of land using our park dedication bylaw and park dedication policy.
Part-lot controlYou can ask us to pass a part-lot control bylaw.
Plan of condominiumYou need to follow this process to divide a property into condominiums.
Plan of subdivisionMake sure your project aligns with our growth management strategy.
Planning resourcesResources to help you plan your development in Kitchener.
Pre-submission consultationFor some projects, we set up a meeting before you apply for a permit.
Public art for developersWe encourage private and institutional developers to include public art in their projects.
Road occupancy or work permitsYou need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Sanitary or stormwater discharge permitsWe regulate the discharge of water, wastewater and stormwater.
Sanitary and stormwater system alterationsRequest an alteration to our sanitary or stormwater system.
Sign permitsSign guidelines, variance information and current variance requests.
Telecommunication towersInformation about proposed telecommunication towers.
Building and industry updates
City updates for the building industry and our annual workshop presentations.
Building standards
Ensuring proposed developments are safe, structurally sound and follow codes.
Demolition control
We control demolition of buildings to preserve residential units.
Development charges
Fees we charge for developments in urban and suburban areas.
Development manual
Reference documents for developers and builders.
Grants and incentives
Apply for a grant to save money on your project or other initiative.
Land development applications
Links to development resources to help with your project.
Planning around rapid transit (PARTS)
How we're planning the areas around rapid transit stations.
Park dedication
We ask for land or cash-in-lieu of land using our park dedication bylaw and park dedication policy.
Part-lot control
You can ask us to pass a part-lot control bylaw.
Plan of condominium
You need to follow this process to divide a property into condominiums.
Plan of subdivision
Make sure your project aligns with our growth management strategy.
Planning resources
Resources to help you plan your development in Kitchener.
Pre-submission consultation
For some projects, we set up a meeting before you apply for a permit.
Public art for developers
We encourage private and institutional developers to include public art in their projects.
Road occupancy or work permits
You need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Sanitary or stormwater discharge permits
We regulate the discharge of water, wastewater and stormwater.
Sanitary and stormwater system alterations
Request an alteration to our sanitary or stormwater system.
Sign permits
Sign guidelines, variance information and current variance requests.
Telecommunication towers
Information about proposed telecommunication towers.


Title: View our Tax questions page
Book an appointment
City Hall is open for in-person services. If you want to plan your visit and reduce waiting times, pleasebook an appointment.Many services are also available online or by phone.
How do I pay my taxes?
You can pay your taxes using our e-billing portal, pre-authorized payments, online banking, by mail, in person and more. Learn more on ourpaying your taxes page.
What are the current property tax rates?
Visit ourunderstanding your property taxes pageto find the current rates.
What do I do if I’m buying or selling a house?
If you’re buying or selling your home,please send us an emailor call 519-741-2450 with this information:
property address and roll numberlegal closing datefull legal names of all those on titlecontact information including home, business and cell numbersmailing instructionsname of the lawyer acting on your behalf
When are taxes due?
Residential property taxes are due on the first business days of March, May, July and September.
Commercial, industrial and multi-residential taxes are normally due the first business days of March, May, September and October.


Title: View our Indigenous communities use of space page
Spaces
Bookable spaces in Kitchener include:
meeting rooms at community centresoutdoor green space at city parkspicnic shelterscity-run arenas like The Aud
Visit ourrental spaces pageto see the full list of facilities.
A full list of bookable spaces in Waterloo is availableon their website.
Fees
We're waiving rental-related fees for using city spaces foreligible Indigenous cultural and ceremonial events.
Rental-related fees include:
space rental feecity fees for associated permits if applicable (example: tent permits)insurance coverage (speak to your staff contact to discuss)
Depending on your event, there may be other fees you need to pay to the region or province.
Eligibility
To be eligible for waived rental-related fees, an event must meet all the criteria below:
be an event that serves the Indigenous community, including Indigenous organizations, groups, families or individualscomply with all city policies and bylaws related to space rentals
How to book space for an Indigenous cultural or ceremonial eventIndigenous groups may book space for their eligible Indigenous cultural or ceremonial events by following the steps below.Internet-connected device or telephone.Contact city staff with a booking requestFor City of Kitchener facility and park bookings, pleasesend us an emailFor City of Waterloo facility and park bookings,visit their websiteCity staff coordinate supportCity staff will work closely with the event organizer to coordinate the booking details for a space depending on availability.Some events may require permits. Staff can help provide support while navigating any City, Regional or provincial policies and permits.Insurance is required. The amount of coverage needed varies depending on the event. Staff can answer your questions about what is needed.Booking of space is scheduled at no charge to the event organizerCity staff schedule the booking and waive fees required by the City (i.e. rental related fees, special event licenses and permits).


Title: View our Minor sports page
Ice sports
Skating
KW Sertoma Speed Skating, 519-742-4026KW Skating Club, 519-886-5972
Ice hockey
Kitchener Minor Hockey, 519-579-2229
Ringette
Kitchener Ringette Association, 519-744-5249
Baseball, softball and t-ball
Kitchener Minor Baseball Association, 519-741-9999Kitchener Waterloo Minor Boys Softball Association, 519-579-2888Kitchener Minor Girls Softball Association, 519-745-4722Forest Hill T-Ball, 519-570-9494S.W. Optimists T-Ball, 519-497-6058Stanley Park T-Ball
Swimming and diving
KW Diving Club, 519-580-5647Region of Waterloo Swim Club (ROW), 519-885-1310Waterloo Region Artistic Swim Club, 519-620-3846
Other water sports
Conestoga Sailing Club, 519-638-5241KW Water Polo, 519-578-6763
Gymnastics
KW Gymnastics Club, 519-743-4970
Hockey – field and inline
KW Olympic Field Hockey, 519-886-2246
Soccer
Kitchener Soccer Club, 519-896-8947
Football and rugby
Waterloo Region Minor FootballWaterloo County Rugby Club
Outdoor winter sports
Waterloo Region Nordic Sports Club, 519-880-1719Waterloo Region Track 3 Ski School, 519-748-9802
Court sports
KW Badminton Club, 519-742-1844KW Youth Basketball, 519-888-6221KW Predators Volleyball, 519-570-2977
Martial arts and boxing
Asahi Judo Club, 519-743-4998Tsuruoka Kai Karate Do KW, 226-789-6094Waterloo Region Boxing Academy, 519-575-9006
Accessible sports
KW Sidewinders Sledge Hockey, 519-632-7282KW Special Olympics, 519-578-3113
Other sports
KW Minor Lacrosse, 519-884-4641KW Track and Field, 519-725-3343TopSpin Table Tennis, 519-747-2919Waterloo County Cycling ClubExcelsior Fencing Club, 519-745-1381Heritage Greens Lawn Bowling Club, 519-748-0082Stars Orienteering Club, 519-743-9103
Councils and resources
KW KidSport, 519-722-4399, ext. 7KW Sports Council, 519-886-6918


Title: View our City Hall outdoor spaces page
Project overview
The City Hall Outdoor Spaces Rehabilitation Project is the plan to improve infrastructure components at the site and surrounding streets and modernize the functionality and accessibility of the space.
In February 2020, council awarded a tender for the project. We’re repairing the parking garage waterproofing membrane, drainage infrastructure and surface paving. We will replace the ice rink and water feature.
Review these documents for more information:
project plan2016 staff report2017 staff report2020 staff report
Construction schedule
This project has two phases.
Phase one
Renovations to Carl Zehr Square and its water feature are complete:
the water feature operates as a splash pad from 7:30 to 10:30 a.m. dailyfrom 10:30 a.m. to 7 p.m., it operates as a wading poolthe fountain shuts off at 10:30 p.m. nightly
Remaining work around Carl Zehr Square and along College Street is complete.
Phase two
Phase two includes this work:
Young Street between the City Hall doors and King Street: completeYoung Street between the City Hall doors and the parking garage ramp: scheduled to be complete by the end of Julyraised garden on Duke Street: scheduled to be complete by mid-Augustparking garage ramp closure: beginning early August, one side at a time
Phase two is scheduled to be complete in October 2023.


Title: View our Sanitary or stormwater discharge permits page
About this process
We regulate the discharge of water, wastewater and stormwater in compliance with theRegion of Waterloo Sewer Use By-Law 21-036and theCity of Kitchener Municipal Code Chapter 930 for Sewer Systemsto ensure the health and safety of the environment, public and city staff.
Discharge permits help to protect our sewer system and regional wastewater treatment plants by ensuring there is enough capacity in the sewer system and limiting unnecessary material from being discharged.
Depending on your situation, you may need separate discharge permits from the Region of Waterloo.Apply on their website.
If you want to drain your pool or hot tub, visit ourbackyard pool safety page.
When you need a permit
If you need to discharge water, wastewater or stormwater into the sanitary or storm sewer system, you must submit an application for a Discharge Permit and get approval.
You need a discharge permit for any stormwater or wastewater discharges into city or regional sewers including, but not limited to:
construction dewateringwell or groundwaterexcess rainwater or surface waterwastewater to sewers that exceeds the bylaw limitsother types of wastewater discharges
Types of permits
The Region of Waterloo handles most of the discharge permits in Kitchener. We accept applications for temporary discharge permits for city sewers.
Learn more and apply:
temporary discharge permitother permits through the Region of Waterloo
Temporary discharge permit
A temporary discharge permit allows the property to discharge water temporarily for construction-related dewatering activities.
Choose the option that suits your needs:
city sewers:application requirements belowregional sewers:apply through the Region of Waterloo
Other permits through the Region of Waterloo
Apply for these permits through theRegion of Waterloo:
general discharge permit: allows the property to discharge water from a private well or rain harvesting processsurcharge permit: allows the property to discharge water that exceeds the by-law limits for one or more treatable parameters:Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD),Total Suspended Solids,Phosphorus, orTotal Kjeldahl Nitrogencompliance permit: allows the property to discharge water that exceeds the bylaw limits temporarily. The compliance permit includes specific timeframes and conditions, expecting necessary changes to be implemented to ensure the discharge is within the allowable limits before the permit expires.
Apply through the Region of Waterloo
What you need for your application
In your application for a City of Kitchener temporary discharge permit, you must include:
cover letterproject design briefsupporting documents
Cover letter
Your cover letter must include:
applicant information (legal name and address)agent or consultant information (name, title and address)owner information (name, title and address)brief project/site information (examples: subdivision number, site plan number, project name, municipal address, etc.) and description of the dewatering activityidentify and list the documents included in the submission
Project design brief
Your project design brief must include:
existing conditions, description of proposed works, and approximate project schedulegroundwater conditions, including average groundwater level on the propertydepth of excavation and site grade elevationcontamination history of soil and/or groundwater for the premisesidentification of environmentally sensitive / protected areasengineering drawings with discharge setup information:location of source material and discharge locationidentification of city infrastructurequantity and quality management infrastructure (e.g., tank, control manhole, treatment system, etc.)piping layout, location of flow meters, sampling ports, treatment facilities, flow control valves, etc.method of discharge (including how the use of the city property, sidewalks, and roads will not be impacted or cause unsafe conditions for the public)equipment specification informationmonitoring planvolume and flow rates (with supporting calculations)proposed duration dates, including times of operationsemergency contact information and management planssewer capacity reviewreview of the downstream capacity for the sewer to accept the requested maximum total discharge flow rateother informationall effluent must meet the sewer by-law and all other regulatory requirements
Supporting documents
Open the accordions below to find the files that must be included in your submission.
All temporary discharge permit submissions must include digital copies of the items outlined below as applicable:
certificate of insuranceMinistry of the Environment, Conservation and Parks (MECP) requirements and approvals:Environmental Activity and Sector Registry (EASR) - for construction dewatering if discharge is greater than 50,000 litres and less than 400,000 litres per day; and/or,Permit to Take Water (PTTW)Water Taking Report and Discharge Report, as required underMECP EASRall reports and drawings must follow the MECP requirementslaboratory analysishydrogeological reportother reports and documentation
You must monitor water levels in the receiving sewers often to avoid adverse effects. Do not discharge during heavy rainfall.
You must stop discharge immediately and notify our operations staff in case of any adverse effects (quantity and/or quality).
Submit your application
Please apply at least eight weeks before planned activities.
If you have any questions, pleasesend us an email.
How to apply for a temporary discharge permitPlease follow these steps to complete the application.Internet-connected deviceprinterCollect your documents and prepare your applicationReview theapplication requirementsand complete any required forms.Send the application by emailSend the completed application and any attachments to usby email.If your application is larger than 10 MB, pleasecontact usto arrange for a file transfer.
After you apply
When we get your application, we will review it for completeness. If we need more information, we will contact you.
If we approve your application, an issued approval will contain conditions relating to the discharge activity that must be followed during the approval period. If you do not comply, we may revoke your approval or take enforcement actions.
Relevant bylaws
Review these relevant bylaws to help with the application process:
Region of Waterloo Sewer UseCity of Kitchener Sewer Use


Title: View our Kiwanis park and pool page
Contact information
Address: 1000 Kiwanis Park Drive
Phone number: 519-741-2200 ext. 3485
Email Kiwanis Park and Pool
Hours
Daily park hours: 11:30 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Daily swim times (beginning June 22):
afternoon: 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.twilight: 3:30 to 7 p.m.
Kiwanis outdoor pool will open for the season on Saturday, June 22. See you at the pool!
Parking
Kiwanis Park is closed to vehicle traffic until spring 2024. Please park in the parking lot off Kiwanis Park Drive and enter the park without your vehicle.
Free parking is available off Kiwanis Park Drive. There are accessible parking spaces near the entrance to the pool area.
There are no bike racks at Kiwanis Park and Pool.
Washrooms
Washrooms are available during pool hours.
Park
Kiwanis Park has a playground, dog park and canoe launch. There are also athletic fields and beach volleyball courts. The park is open year-round, but Kiwanis Pool is only open in the summer.
There is an accessible swing seat at Kiwanis Park.
Dog park
Our leash-free dog park is a one kilometre walk from the pool and parking area. You do not need to pay to use the dog park.
Please keep your dog on its leash until you get in the dog park.
Sports
Our athletic fields and beach volleyball courts are available on a first come, first serve basis, or you can book ahead. You must bring your own equipment.
Learn more aboutfield bookings.
Canoe launch
Bring your canoe to Kiwanis Park and enjoy a trip down the Grand River. You do not need to pay to use our canoe launch.
Look forMarsland Landing at Kiwanis Parkon your navigation app.
Pool area
Our fenced pool area includes:
a lake-like poolpicnic tables
The Snack Shack is permanently closed. Outside food and drink is allowed at the pool. There are refreshment and snack vending machines on site. The vending machines do not take cash.
See upcoming swim times on a calendar
Pool area fees
We chargeadmission feesto use the fenced pool area, including our picnic tables and change rooms.
Flotation devices
You can use these flotation devices at Kiwanis Park:
lifejacketsnoodlespuddle jumperswater wingsflutterboards (not boogie boards)uncovered 1-person baby boatsballs and small toys
We will allow other devices if:
they are smaller than 91 cm x 91 cm (3 feet x 3 feet)there is visibility above the child in the flotation devicethere are fewer than 100 guests at the poolif the flotation device is being used for its intended purposethe weather conditions are suitable
In extenuating circumstances, where safety is a concern, the lifeguards reserve the right to further restrict flotation devices to ensure the safety of our guests. Our lifeguards are responsible for the safety of all swimmers. Any obstruction to their view of the pool bottom and other swimmers will be restricted. If you have questions or require an accommodation, please see a staff member in the lifeguard hut.
Summer camp
Subscribe to this page to get an email when we add future camps.
Swimming fees
We charge admission fees to use the fenced pool area, including our picnic tables and change rooms.
Single swim time fees
If you want to swim during a single block of time (see pool hours), you'll pay the fees below:
adults (18 to 54 years old): $6.62children (0 to 17 years old) and seniors (over 55 years old): $4.42family: $15.06
All day swim fees
If you want to swim all day or across multiple blocks of time on the same day (see pool hours), you'll pay the fees below:
adult (18 to 54 years old): $10.62children (0 to 17 years old) and seniors (over 55 years old): $6.81family: $24.15
Passes
We accept three-month passes, summer passes and books of tickets but do not sell them at Kiwanis park and pool. Visit one of our otheroutdoor or indoor poolsto get your pass.
Swim admission guidelines
Open the accordions below to learn about our pool guidelines.
Pool rulesAll bathers must obey instructions from the lifeguardsPosted Pool Rules and Health Regulations must be adhered to at all timesAll bathers must shower before entering the pool areaNo outdoor footwear on the pool deckWalk carefully on the pool deck. The deck may be slipperyNo divingAge requirementsFor swim admission purposes, a caregiver is defined as someone 12 years or older, responsible for the child.A swimmer to caregiver ratio defines the number of swimmers that can be supervised by a caregiver. Example: (4:1 ratio) means four swimmers can be supervised by one caregiver.Direct supervision means someone who is actively watching their child and can respond immediately to help their child.under 10 years old: requires supervisionunder 7 years old:shallow side of the black line: your child must be directly supervised by their caregiver at all times (2:1 ratio)deep side of the black line: your child must be within one arm's reach of the caregiver at all times (2:1 ratio)7 to 9 years who have not passed aswim test:shallow side of the black line: your child must be directly supervised by the caregiver at all times (4:1 ratio or 8:1 ratio if all swimmers are wearing lifejackets)deep side of the black line: your child must be within one arm's reach of the caregiver at all times (4:1 ratio or 8:1 ratio if all swimmers are wearing lifejackets)7 to 9 years who have passed aswim test: may swim unaccompanied on either side of the black line as long as a caregiver remains in the pool environment to supervise.Lifejacketslifejackets may need to be supplied by swimmers as there is a limited supply at each facilitylifejackets may not be available at all programslifejackets must be the appropriate size for the swimmer and approved by Transport Canadawater wings, puddle jumpers or any other floatation devices are not acceptable as lifejacketsDeep end and swimmer safetyAn aquatic staff member may request any swimmer attempts a swim test at any time. To ensure the safety of all swimmers, if at any point a swimmer exhibits any signs that they are tired or weak, aquatic staff may ask them to leave any deep area of a pool and return to the shallow area to attempt a swim test. This also includes anyone over the age of 10. It is up to the lifeguards on duty to allow swimmers to return to the deep area.Health regulationsNo person having a communicable disease or open sores on his or her body shall enter the poolNo person shall bring a glass container onto the deck or into the poolNo person shall pollute the water in the pool in any mannerSpitting, spouting of water, and blowing the nose in the pool or on the deck are prohibitedNo person shall engage in boisterous play in or about the poolThe maximum number of bathers permitted on the deck and in the pool at any time is 1000The emergency phone is located in the guard officeHead-first entries are not permittedAny people with serious medical conditions must inform the lifeguard in the Lifeguard Office.Spray feature rulesSwim clothing is requiredSafety first – no running, pushing, or rough playBe respectful – always show courtesy to fellow splash pad users and take turnsSupervised play is safe play – children under age 10 who have not passed a swim test must be supervised by an adult. Adults are responsible for their child’s safety at all times.Food, tobacco, alcohol, and glass containers – not permitted in the splash pad areaPets and animals – not permitted in the splash pad areaStash the trash – leave the splash pad area clean; place garbage in the containers providedWeather – for your safety, when there is thunder or lightning, leave the splash pad area immediatelySkateboards, rollerblades, and bikes – not permitted in the splash pad areaHealth – people with communicable disease, open sores, skin infections, nausea, vomiting, or diarrhea are not permitted to use the splash pad.Water not intended for drinkingFor maintenance related concerns please alert the lifeguardsSurface can get slippery. Footwear is recommendedBlocking drains and allowing water to “pool” in the spray features contributes to unsafe playing conditions. Please ensure that no blockages occur in the spray features during your visit.Children of all abilities and ages are welcome to play together at these spray features. There are elements of risk in using the spray features that can be reduced by acting responsibly and by complying with these regulations.The splash pad is supervised by lifeguards. All bathers must obey the instructions of the lifeguardsPets and animalsPets and animals are not permitted in the pool or spray features areaAll pets must remain on a leashFood and beveragesNo food or beverages are allowed on the deck, in the pool, or spray feature areaNo person shall bring a glass container onto the deck or into the poolStereos and musicThose who wish to use small stereos or un-amplified musical instruments as part of their event must secure written permission from the Park Supervisor at least two weeks prior to the date of their rental.Larger PA systems are not permitted.On-site City of Kitchener staff reserve the right to decide what level of volume is acceptable.AlcoholThe consumption of alcohol is strictly prohibited at Kiwanis Park. if guests are found with alcohol will be asked to leave the park.City Security and Waterloo Regional Police will be notified.
Swim admission test
To provide a safe and enjoyable aquatic environment, we've established a facility swim test standard to help evaluate participants’ swimming ability. This test is used in conjunction with the Wristband Identification Program.
Open the accordions below to learn about the swim admission test.
Swim test assessmentThe requirements of the patron are to demonstrate comfort in the water and swim on their front for 20 metres in the designated swim test area of the pool. The swim test will also include a change in direction.To properly assess a participant’s swimming ability, aquatic staff must observe the following during the swim test:no touching of the bottom or wall of the poolcompletion of the entire distance comfortably and confidentlyswimmer’s body must be positioned horizontal and near the surfacecontinuous swimming with no stopping or resting at any pointstrong forward movement throughoutan open water change of directionswimmer’s ability to submerge face under waterswimmer’s ability to take a breath while swimmingSwim CardChildren between 7 and 9 years old, who successfully complete the swim test, will receive a swim test card. Swimmers must present their swim test cards to receive a green band before admission to a recreation swim.Wristband Identification ProgramUpon entry to a pool, visitors 0 to 9 years old will be given a coloured wristband to help staff identify their swimming ability. The colours are defined as follows:Red bandchildren 0 to 6 years old must be accompanied and within arm’s reach of caregiver.caregiver ratio 2:1Yellow bandchildren 7 to 9 years old are assumed to be non-swimmers and must be accompanied and within arm’s reach of caregivercaregiver ratio 4:1 without lifejacketscaregiver ratio 8:1 with lifejackets for all childrenGreen bandchildren 7 to 9 years old who have passed the Swim Admission Test may swim unaccompaniedcaregiver must remain in the pool environment to supervise.Blue bandall swimmers 10 years and older will get a blue wristband to show that they have paid admission to the pool
Pool closures and weather policy
Pool closures during a programIf staff need to close the pool during a program, we’ll issue a credit in these ways:pre-registered programs: credit to ActiveNet accountdrop-in programs: complimentary pass, see pool entrance staffWe will not issue refunds or credits if you choose to leave due to light rain or cool weather.Weather policyFor your safety, we’ll close the pool in these situations:heavy rainfalllightning or thunderWe will keep the pool will remain closed for 30 minutes after staff hear the last bolt or lightning or sound of thunder.If in doubt, call us to check if we are open.
Pool closures during a program
If staff need to close the pool during a program, we’ll issue a credit in these ways:
pre-registered programs: credit to ActiveNet accountdrop-in programs: complimentary pass, see pool entrance staff
We will not issue refunds or credits if you choose to leave due to light rain or cool weather.
Weather policy
For your safety, we’ll close the pool in these situations:
heavy rainfalllightning or thunder
We will keep the pool will remain closed for 30 minutes after staff hear the last bolt or lightning or sound of thunder.
If in doubt, call us to check if we are open.
Rentals
You can rent space at Kiwanis Park and Pool for meetings or events. Rates are per hour and include HST.
Tim Hortons shelter: $30.77 per hour, including HSTBeachside shelter: $60.03 per hour, including HSTvolleyball court rental: $30.16 per hour, including HSTrental guest admission fee into Kiwanis Park is separate
Note that when booked after business hours a three-hour minimum rental is required and additional staff charges will apply.
Depending on the nature of your event other rental costs can include:
Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensing
If you're interested in booking this facility or getting a more detailed quote, pleasecomplete the inquiry formto tell us more about your event. Staff will confirm the details of your event with you before finalizing the booking.


Title: View our Golf clubhouses page
Hours
Doon Valley
Clubhouse
Monday to Thursday: 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.Friday to Sunday: 8 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Trailer
daily: 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Cart
daily: 11 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Rockway
Clubhouse/half-way
Monday to Thursday: 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.Friday to Sunday: 11 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Shackdaily: 10 a.m. to 8 p.m.
Menu
Use the accordions below to find menu prices. The menu and pricing are subject to availability and may change without notice.
Pub foodhot dog: $6.50sausages: $9.50chicken tenders with fries: $16fairway 8oz burger: $18.25blue and gold burger: $12.50chicken parm burger: $16buffalo chicken burger: $17nachos and cheese: $15onion rings: $8onion rings poutine: $12.50poutine: $12.50fries: $6Breakfastclassic breakfast: $7French toast: $8bacon breakfast sandwich: $6.50egg and cheese breakfast sandwich: $5.25hungry man breakfast: $15Soups and saladsGreek salad: $9Cobb salad: $9soup of the day: $5Sandwiches and wrapscrispy chicken wrap: $18grilled chicken wrap: $18BLT: $6monte cristo: $16chicken quesadillas: $17veggie quesadillas: $16Snacksmuffin: $3.25danish: $5.50croissant: $5.50big belly cookie: $3.25Alcoholbeer draught 14oz domestic/premium: $8.25beer draught 20oz domestic/premium: $9.75pitcher: $25beer tallboy - domestic: $9beer tallboy - premium: $9.50beer small: $6.50coolers:$9.25Caesars small: $9.25liquor spirits - single: $8.50liquor spirits - double: $11.50liquor spirits - double premium: $13wine 5oz: $8.50wine bottle: $36Beveragespop: $4water: $3.50Gatorade: $5.75coffee/tea: $2.50juice: $4.50Confectionarycandy Twizzlers king size: $4candy Fuzzy Peach king size: $7candy Swedish Berries king size: $7chocolate bar king size: $6chips bag king size: $4Clif bar: $5
Pro shop
You will find a fully stocked pro shop at Rockway and Doon Valley golf courses, carrying all of your golf equipment and apparel needs at the lowest prices in the Kitchener-Waterloo area.
We carry products from these brands:
CallawayTitleistTaylor MadeCobra-Pumaand many more
We're also happy to order in products you can't find in stock. Grab what you need before your round or grab the perfect gift for the golfer in your life. Gift cards are available.
Our usual stock includes:
golf balls, gloves and accessoriesgolf clubs and bagsshoesclub fittingsclothing and headwearsunglasses
Pro shop hours
Our pro shops are open during course operating hours throughout the season.


Title: View our Advisory committees and boards page
About committees
Committees give advice and feedback to city council and standing committees on a variety of issues, including arts and culture, accessibility, downtown and the environment. Boards have the autonomy to make decisions for the good of their organizations.
Each advisory committee and board also has at least one city council member.
Accessible formats and communication supports are available to committee/board members (and guests) upon request. If you require assistance to take part in a city meeting or event, please call 519-741-2345 or TTY 1-866-969-9994.
Apply to join an advisory committee or board
Advisory committee and board applications are closed. Subscribe to this page to get an email when applications open again.
Advisory committees
Open the accordions below to learn about our advisory committees. For more information, including planned work for each committee during the current term, please use the contact information in the accordion.
Active Transportation and Trails Advisory CommitteeMeets: second Tuesday of each month at 4 p.m.Provides community input to assist city council in creating a livable, environmentally friendly city that is safe for walking and cycling. Advises on design, development and delivery of cycling and trail policies, programs and facilities. For more information, please contactDarren Kropfat 519-741-2200, ext. 7314 or review the committee'sterms of reference.(current terms of reference under review)  The current appointees are Councillor Councillor Paul Singh, Matthew Bells, Emily Bennett, Philip Charbonneau, Lynn Dramnitzki, Bart Forwell, Victoria Hand,  Greg Piccini, Rida Rahman, Barry Tracey and Wanda West.Aeronautical noise advisory committeeThis committee is temporarily suspended.Provides regular and effective communications between the Region of Waterloo International Airport, residents, local aviation businesses and users, businesses located within Canada's Technology Triangle, Transport Canada, Nav Canada, Canadian Business Aircraft Association and the Air Transport Association of Canada, with regards to the effects of aviation noise from the airport on the surrounding community. For more information, please contact the airport manager at 519-648-2256, or review thecommittee's terms of reference.Arts and culture advisory committeeMeets: third Tuesday of each month at 4 p.m.Provides advice and recommendations to city council and staff on arts and culture matters to further ourstrategic directions. For more information, please contactKaroline Varinor call 519-741-2200 ext. 7912, or review the committee'sterms of reference.The current appointees are Councillor Dave Schnider, Olufunmilayo Ajibade, Annabelle Girard, Julie Hall, Maggie Lam, Maria Melo, Chidi Nwene, Brenda Reid, Isabella Stefanescu and Esther Wainaina.Climate change and environment committeeMeets: third Thursday of each month at 4 p.m.An advisory committee to city council on all environmental matters. The committee considers the environment in its broadest possible terms, and its mandate includes all activities and operations of the city that affect the environment. For more information, please contactShannon Lodenquaiat 519-741-2200, ext. 7407, or check out the committee'sterms of reference.The current appointees are Councillors Scott Davey and Stephanie Stretch, Klas Bockasten, Jennifer Clary-Lemon, Morgan Garner, Gudmundur Johannesson, Braden Kurczak, Kyle Loveless, Veronica Nhio-Son, Mahyar Shafii, Farzaneh Tohidi, Brian Unrau and Brooklin Wallis.Compass KitchenerMeets: first Wednesday of the month at 4 p.m.Validates the Compass Kitchener vision, guiding principles, values and strategic priorities on a regular basis, with the community's input and participation. This committee creates and leads public processes to determine community concerns, identify priorities for action and monitor progress toward achieving the community vision. For more information, please contactAllison Remillardat 519-741-2200, ext. 7092, or check out the Compass Kitchenerterms of reference.The current appointees are Evren Aitinkas, Kim Brabazon, Troy Glover, Alide Fortmanis, Ruth Lavender, Wasai Rahimi, Judy Stephens-Wells, Linda Terry, Lee-Anne Thompson, Lori Trumper, Kari Williams and James Young.Downtown advisory committeeMeets: fourth Thursday of each month at 4 p.m.Assists the economic development division with the implementation of various initiatives of the Downtown Kitchener Action Plan, and advises city council on matters that affect the downtown and its adjacent neighbourhoods. For more information, please contactThea Mistryat 226-750-0592, or check out the committee'sterms of reference. The current appointees are Councillors Debbie Chapman and Stephanie Stretch, Sandra Castle, Joel Leslie, William Turman and Brandon Van Dam.Economic development advisory committeeAdvises city council and the economic development division on the development and ongoing implementation of economic development strategies and initiatives. For more information, please contactKatelyn Remusat 519-741-2200 ext. 7957, or check out the committee'sterms of reference.  The current appointees are Councillors Ayo Owodunni, Dave Schnider and Margaret Johnston, Ali Akbar, Mark Bingeman, Ben Campbell, Joe Curto, Srikanth Desikachar, Chuck Howitt, Oanh Kasperski, Paul Kreutner, Matthew Kruschack, Jason Malfara, Margaret Lam, Jeffrey Paquette, Laura Rodriguez Reyes, Keean Sarani, Graham Trusler and Barclay Whittaker.Equity and Anti-Racism Advisory CommitteeMeets: monthly or at the discretion of the committee. View themeeting calendarfor upcoming meeting dates.This advisory committee provides advice and recommendations to Council on matters related to equity and anti-racism to support and further the City’s strategic directions. The committee supports the Equity, Anti-Racism and Indigenous Initiatives division as a resource, source of collaboration and feedback, and serves as a conduit to the larger community when additional feedback and engagement is required. The committee also serves as the selection committee for the Racialized & Indigenous Supports for Equity(RISE) Fund, a community grant program for Black, Indigenous and racialized groups and organizations.For more information, please contactRea Parchmentor review the committee'sterms of reference.The current appointees are: Ann Marie Beals, Avni Adams, Ayesha Munir, Danny Martin, Saba Oji, Fiorella Benini, Oluseun Olayinka, Paul Okoye, Rida Rahman and Veronica Vasquez.Heritage KitchenerMeets: first Tuesday of each month at 4 p.m.Advises on matters involving conservation of publicly and privately owned cultural heritage resources within Kitchener, and serves as ourmunicipal heritage committee, as defined in the Ontario Heritage Act. For more information, please contactMarilyn Mills, or check out the committee'sterms of reference.The current appointees are Councillors Christine Michaud and Debbie Chapman, Ilona Bodendorfer, Peter Ciuciura, Shannon Eckel-Braun, Jean Haalboom, Tyler Marshall, Natalie Pikulski, Andrew Portengen, Des Rosskopf and Donny Vongphakdy.Safe and healthy community advisory committeeMeets: second Thursday of each month at 4 p.m.Advises city council and staff on policies, programs and services we're involved with that relate to inclusion and belonging, with a focus on building healthy communities and bridges to engagement. For more information, please contactJanis McKenzieat 519-741-2200, ext. 7225, or check out the committee'sterms of reference.
Boards
Open the accordions below to learn about our boards. For more information, including planned work for each committee during the current term, please use the contact information in the accordion.
Centre in the Square board of directorsMeets: bi-monthly on a Wednesday at 8 a.m.The Centre In The Square Inc.is a not-for-profit arts corporation, which operates and maintains the city-owned venue known as the Centre In The Square (CITS) where both local and international artists perform. The main duty of the board of directors is one of governance. From time to time, board members with specific skills are sought including, but not limited to, legal, accounting, human resources, marketing and fund raising. Please ensure you specifically highlight any skills, experience or expertise that would benefit CITS in your application. For more information, please contact the Centre In The Square at 519-578-5660. The current appointees are Councillors Bil Ioanndis, Paul Singh and Scott Davey, Alex Kinsella and Kayleigh Platz.Board descriptionPosition:Centre In The Square Board of DirectorsTerm:Normally three (3) years, with the option of a second term for three (3) years.A director that has served two (2) consecutive terms will be eligible for reappointment to the board if they sit out for one full year after the second consecutive term.Legal requirements:Must be at least 18 years old, a Canadian citizen, and a resident or work at a company with a City of Kitchener address. Maybe not employed by Centre In The Square.Time commitment required:A minimum of six (6) board meetings, normally held on Wednesday mornings from 8 a.m. to 9:30 a.m.All reports are distributed via email and/on internet.General function of the board:The CITS Board of Directors stewards the financials and operations of the facility setting key policies for implementation by the staff. The Board appoints the General Manager who directs programming, brand management, customer service, marketing, fundraising, finance and operations, including all other personnel.Specific duties of board members:Support the organization and actively fundraise for it.Oversee the short-term and long-range maintenance and improvements of the facility.Establish and monitor the organization's strategic plan, measuring KPls and adjust plans to meet the overall goals.Set the annual operating budget for the organization and facility. Approve the yearly audited statements.Assess and adopt policies to govern the organization and its operations.Recruit and evaluate annual performance of the General Manager.Participate in planned public relations and act as spokesperson for the organization, when required.Endorse requests and applications to local, provincial and national funding programs to support programming activities and/or infrastructure improvements.Attend all Board meetings, committee meetings as assigned.Attend outside meetings and community events.Ensure the organization meets health and safety standards and other legislated compliance for public facilities.Promote and advocate the role of CITS as a presenter and animator of the performing arts in the KW region.Desirable qualifications and experience:Business acumen and demonstrated leadership abilities.Aptitude for planning - both long and short range.Ability to work in a political environment.Knowledge of the community's social and economic conditions.Skilled in advocacy, fundraising, building management and financial literacy.Contact for more information:Rob Sonoda, General Manager, CITSrsonoda@centreinthesqaure.comDan Carli, Chair, Board of Directorsdecarli232@gmail.comKitchener Housing Inc. board of directorsMeets: third Wednesday of each month at 4 p.m.Provides leadership for this non-profit organization, and remains committed to developing and managing innovative and affordable housing that fosters personal and community growth. The board's purpose is also to expand and diversify the organization's rental housing portfolio by mobilizing community support and financial resources through the development of innovative partnerships. Please ensure your application includes specific experience, skills and expertise that would benefit Kitchener Housing Inc. For more information, please contact Lori Trumper at 519-744-6655, ext. 209. The current appointees are Councillors Bil Ioannidis and Jason Deneault, Melanie Goodfellow, Andrew Vlcek, Cassandra O’Brien, Tara Bedard and Andrew Portengen.Kitchener Public Library boardMeets: third Wednesday of each month at 7 p.m.TheKitchener Public Library(KPL) board, which is established under provincial legislation, is responsible for the management and control of our local public libraries. Please ensure your application includes specific experience, skills and expertise that would benefit KPL. For more information, please contact KPL CEO Mary Chevreau at 519-743-0271, or check out the followingdescription of a board trustee position. The current appointees are Councillors Margaret Johnston and Christine Michaud, Katherine Andrews, Shannon Nicholson, Clare Wagner, Anjali Misra, Dan Deeth, Maggie Lam, Brandon Van Dam, Laura Blythe, Bonita Hansra.
Quasi-judicial committees
Open the accordions below to learn about our quasi-judicial committees. For more information, including planned work for each committee during the current term, please use the contact information in the accordion.
Committee of adjustmentMeets: every third Tuesday morningThecommittee of adjustmentconsiders and makes decisions relative to the following types of planning applications:Minor variances to the zoning bylawConsents (dividing land parcels to create new lots)Validation of titleFence and sign variancesCity council appoints all members of the committee of adjustment.The current appointees are Scott Hannah, Marco Gambetti, Bob McColl, Douglas Pateman and Brian Santos.Dog designation appeal committeeAn appeal tribunal for citizens who have dogs that have been designated by the Kitchener-Waterloo and North Waterloo Humane Society under our dog designation bylaw. For more information, please contactMarilyn Millsat 519-741-2200, ext. 7275, or check out ourdog designation appeal committee guidelinesandappeal application form. The current appointees are Councillors Jason Deneault, Ayo Owodunni and Margaret Johnston (Alternate) and a member of the Canadian Kennel Club.Property standards committeeMeets: last Wednesday of each month at 1 p.m.An appeal tribunal for citizens who have received 'Orders to Comply' from our enforcement staff regarding property standards. For more information, please contactMarilyn Millsat 519-741-2200, ext. 7275, or check out ourproperty standards appeal committee guidelinesandappeal application form.The current appointees are Mike Pulley, Sharlene Mohlman, Cyrus Medina and Sean McKelvie.


Title: Growing Together
About the project
Growing Together will update the planning framework for Kitchener's Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) through land use policies and zoning regulations. This will ensure that our growing MTSAs can continue to grow responsibly for many years to come.
The Growing Together project builds upon previous work done with the community (through the PARTS and Neighbourhood Planning Review projects) while also responding to new direction from the province, implementing the updated Regional Official Plan, and addressing new and emerging city priorities.
Kitchener’s MTSAs are defined by the Region of Waterloo and are subject to new policies at both the provincial and regional level. Growing Together will implement these policies and help us create a city for everyone.
Get involved
We're hosting a series of casual events that explore, in a hands-on way, how growth and change are happening in our community.
Look for us around Kitchener, whether you're at the library picking up a book or at a community centre for a program. Visitour Engage Kitchener pageto find an event.
Learn more on Engage Kitchener
Neighbourhood planning reviews
The Growing Together project is the continuation of our ongoing planning review process that began with PARTS and advanced through the Neighbourhood Planning Review (NPR) project.
Learn more about these projects:
Cedar Hill and Schneider CreekCivic CentreKing Street EastK-W Hospital/MidtownMill Courtland Woodside Park/RockwayVictoria ParkVictoria StreetPlanning Around Rapid Transit Stations (PARTS)


Title: View our Bylaws at home page
Noise
Our noise bylaw is in effect 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. The bylaw limits excessive noise, including:
yellingloud music, radio or TVother unusual noise
City council may grant events exemption from our noise bylaws. Noise exemptions last until 11 p.m. Check thelist of approved noise exemptions.
Construction noise
Construction noise is allowed 7 days a week, including holidays, from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.
Noise complaints
To make a noise complaint, call the Waterloo Regional Police Services non-emergency line at 519-653-7700.
Noise exemptions
Apply for an exemptionif you’re hosting a small private event like a barbecue, wedding or other party that might have excessive noise.
For large scale events, you must apply for anoise exemptionthrough the director of enforcement.
Visit ournoise complaints and exemptions pagefor more information.
Parking
Visit ourparking bylaws pageto find:
street parking bylawsboulevard parking rules
Request an exemptionto park in a legal parking spot overnight between December 1 and March 31.
Lawn watering
The Region of Waterloo's water conservation bylaw is in place from May 31 to September 30 every year. Under the bylaw, you can water your lawn once a week. The day depends on your street address. Find your watering dayon the region's website.
Backyard chickens
You can apply to keep up to 4 chickens in backyard coops. There is a $50 registration fee, and city staff will check your backyard to make sure it complies with ourcoop regulations.
Apply to keep backyard chickens
Where to build your chicken coops
2.5 metres from the side property lineif 2.5 metre space isn’t possible, you can build it closer to the property line withpermission from your neighbours
Backyard fires
On private property, you can light a fire without a permit in a:
fire pitoutdoor fireplacebackyard chiminea
You can burn a fire between 6 and 11 p.m., 7 days a week. Please watch where your smoke travels to avoid disturbing your neighbours.
Keep your fire safe
If you want to have a backyard fire, you must follow these rules:
burn a maximum of 1 metre (3.2 feet) in any directionbe fully contained and controlledhave no flammable ground cover within 1 metre (3.2 feet) of the fireonly burn bush material, including tree limbs, branches and bush trimmings or logs made for fireplaces
A fire must be at least 5 metres (16.4 feet) from any:
property line or fencebuilding or structuretree or hedgeroadoverhead wireanother flammable item
From the time of setting the fire until the fire is totally out:
have a portable fire extinguisher or working garden hose availablean adult owner or occupant must watch and control the fire
Chapter 711of our Municipal Code includes all the regulations for recreational fires.
Fire pits
A fire pit must have a clear, raised, fireproof barrier that surrounds the fire pit to keep it isolated.
Backyard fire complaints
To make a complaint about:
a fire that is currently burning, call the WRPS non-emergency line at519-570-9777a fire pit or recent fire, call us at519-741-2345orsend us an email
Fireworks
You can set off fireworks before 11 p.m. on these days:
Victoria DayCanada DayDiwali
If you want to set off fireworks on any other days, you need to apply for a permit.
You cannot set off fireworks on public property. Please follow our fireworks safety tips below to prevent serious injury.
Fireworks safety tips
Do not set off fireworks
on any street or highwayin any woodlot, forest, public trail or ballparkin any city park without a permitwithin 25 feet of any building or structurein areas with dead undergrowth or treesfirecrackers (including cherry bombs and torpedoes) cannot be sold or set off in Kitchener
When setting off fireworks
only use fireworks outdoorschoose a clear, open areacheck wind direction and speedalways have an adult presenthave water handyuse eye protection and wear non-flammable clothingread and follow directionskeep spectators at least 20 metres from launch areawait 30 minutes after the end of the display and dispose of fireworks properly by soaking in water and then disposing in trash bin
Never
use homemade fireworksgive fireworks to small childrenlight more than one firework at a time, or relight “duds”throw or point fireworks at other peoplecarry fireworks in your pocketshoot fireworks in metal or glass containers
Pets
Visit ourpets and animals pageto learn about:
dog licencespet ownershipwildlife in Kitchener
Snow and ice on sidewalks
You are responsible for keeping the sidewalks around your home clear of snow and ice. After the snow stops falling, you have 24 hours to get the sidewalks down to clear pavement.
Pile snow on:
front lawnsboulevards
Do not pile snow on:
sidewalksroads
If you have a neighbour who can’t shovel their sidewalks, consider helping them shovel to keep everyone safe.


Title: View our Building permit fees page
Permit fees
Our fee schedule includes our current building permit fees.
A rebate fee may apply to your building permit. We automatically refund this fee when the inspector approves the final building inspection.
Find permit fees:
in ourfee scheduleon ourresidential building permits pageon ourindustrial, commercial and institutional building permits page
Pay your fee
You can pay your fee:
by credit cardonlineusing electronic funds transferby chequein person by appointment
By credit card
You can pay by VISA or Mastercard for:
building permitsrebate programfreedom of information request feessurvey request fees
The maximum credit card charge is $5,000 per permit.
We do not accept credit card for development charges or damage deposits.
You can pay by credit cardin person at City Halloronline.
Online
You can pay by VISA or Mastercard from theonline services portalfor:
Pay online
Electronic funds transfer
To pay your permit fee by electronic funds transfer (EFT), follow these steps.
Please note that EFT is not an e-transfer or a bill payment option.
Step 1: Set up your paymentYour building permit fees are due when you get your invoice from our building division.Before starting an EFT payment, you must contact your bank to set up a payee for our account.Pleasesend us an emailasking for the EFT account numbers, including your project address and permit number.Step 2: Fill out the EFT formAfter sending the EFT payment, immediately complete ouronline form.We cannot continue to process your payment before you submit this form.Step 3: Get a digital receiptWe will send you a digital receipt after processing the EFT payment.Step 4: Approval or holdIf there is a discrepancy in the fee payment, we will contact you. We may place a hold on the permit until the payment is resolved.
By cheque
Mail a cheque for your payment that includes your permit number to:
City of KitchenerBuilding division - 5th floor200 King Street WestKitchener, ON N2G 4G7
You can also drop a cheque that includes your permit number in the drop box outside City Hall on Young Street.
In person by appointment
Pleasebook an appointmentto pay your permit fee in person. We accept debit andcredit cardsat City Hall.
Rebate fees
Find the rebate fee for your project on these pages:
ICI building permitsresidential building permits
These projects do not require rebate fees:
deckspoolsshedsfoundation permitstentsbar and restaurant outdoor patiosportable classrooms
Damage deposit
We collect a damage deposit on applicable projects to ensure the road around the project is not damaged during construction. If the road is damaged and not fixed, the money collected will be used to make the repairs needed.
The damage deposit, and the related inspection fee, are required before we issue your building permit.
damage deposit: $142.32 per metre of frontageinspection fee: $51 per metre of frontage, to a maximum of $488
Once grading and all site work have been completed, call us at 519-741-2406 orsend us an emailto request your damage deposit refund. We will perform the site inspection; if no damages are found, we will refund your damage deposit only. This may take up to four weeks.
Stormwater management fee
We collect astormwater managementfee on applicable projects before we issue a building permit. Please contact us at 519-741-2406 for more information.
Development charges
Development chargesmay also apply before we issue your building permit. Please review all necessary information ahead of submitting your permit application.


Title: View our Contact us page
Online
Send us an emailif you have a question or concern.
Report a problem
If you see something listed below that needs our attention,report a problem online.
graffitineedleslitter in a playground, park or trailparkingproperty standardspotholessidewalk show clearingsidewalk trip hazardstrail surface maintenance
If you see a sign that does not comply with oursign bylaw, you canreport it online.
If your concern is not listed, it may fall under theRegion of Waterlooor another organization.
Visit ourcoyotes and wildlife pagefor information about:
sick, injured or orphaned animalsdead animalspests
Social media
Follow us on social media for updates and things to do:
FacebookTwitterInstagram
MyKitchener
Create a freeMyKitcheneraccount to:
build and customize a personalized dashboardget notifications for upcoming registration dates (including summer camps!)report a problem and get updates from staffmanage your property tax and utility bills
Signing up for an account takes less than 5 minutes! You can login to MyKitchener from your computer, tablet or phone.
Create a MyKitchener account
Phone and TTY
City of Kitchener
519-741-2345: report an issue or ask us a question1-866-969-9994: use our TTY system for deaf and hard of hearing callers
Multi-language interpretation supportis available by phone.
Waterloo Region Police Services (WRPS)
911: in an emergency519-570-9777: not in an emergency or to file a noise complaint1-888-420-1777: use the WRPS TTY system for deaf and hard of hearing callers
Please note that if you see someone experiencing a mental health crisis, the WRPS is the only service that can offer an immediate response.
WRPS may dispatch officers in non-emergencies. WRPS is piloting theIntegrated Mobile Police and Crisis Team (IMPACT), where mental health workers accompany police at their discretion between 8 a.m. to midnight.
In person
Kitchener City Hall is located at 200 King Street West in downtown Kitchener.
Customer service
City Hall is open for in-person services from Monday to Friday between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. at our main floor City Hall Service Centre. Staff from all City Hall service areas are available to serve you from one central, accessible location.
When you arrive at City Hall, staff will be available to check you in for your appointment or service request or check in at one of our convenient self-serve kiosks.
If you want to plan your visit and reduce your waiting time, pleasebook an appointment.
Multi-language and American Sign Language (ASL) interpretation supportis available in person at City Hall.
Hours of operation
The building is open during these hours:
Monday to Friday: 7 a.m. to 9 p.m.weekends and statutory holidays: 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Parking and transit
However you get downtown, there are options available:transitvehicle and bike parkingplan your routeTransitHop off the ION at either the Kitchener City Hall or Victoria Park station for a quick walk. Central Station is a short walk away, as well.TheseGRTbus routes stop nearby:route 7route 8route 20iXpress 204Vehicle and bike parkingParking is available in the City Hall parking garage, as well as other City of Kitchener parking lots around Downtown Kitchener. Visit ourparking locations pageto find somewhere to park.Securebike parkingis available in the City Hall parking garage.You can pay for parking in surface lots through thePassport Parking app.Download the app, available both on iOS & Android.Plan your routeCheckroad closureson your route before coming downtown.
Transit
Hop off the ION at either the Kitchener City Hall or Victoria Park station for a quick walk. Central Station is a short walk away, as well.
TheseGRTbus routes stop nearby:
route 7route 8route 20iXpress 204
Vehicle and bike parking
Parking is available in the City Hall parking garage, as well as other City of Kitchener parking lots around Downtown Kitchener. Visit ourparking locations pageto find somewhere to park.
Securebike parkingis available in the City Hall parking garage.
You can pay for parking in surface lots through thePassport Parking app.Download the app, available both on iOS & Android.
Plan your route
Checkroad closureson your route before coming downtown.
Field trips
We offer free City Hall tours as field trips! Learn more on ourschool tours page.
Mail
Our mailing address is:
City of KitchenerPO Box 1118Kitchener, ONCanada N2G 4G7
Multi-language interpretation support
Click the "Translate" button at the top of any page on this website to translate the page.
As part of our commitment to delivering an excellent customer service experience for all citizens, service in city facilities is available in over 200 languages including, at City Hall only, American Sign Language (ASL).
You can access on-demand language interpretation support 24-7 by phone, or in-person duringbusiness hours. On the spot, staff will connect you to an interpreter in the language of your choice to help you.
For in-person visits, staff and customers can actively listen and participate in a call with an interpreter in the language of your choice, using two-way handsets available at our service counters.
At City Hall, you can also access support by video in the language of your choice, including ASL. We hope to bring this service to more facilities in the future, so subscribe to this page to get email updates.
Interpretation services are currently available in-person at:
all City Hall service counters(including for Kitchener Utilities inquiries)community centresindoor poolsarenascemeteries
Bylaw and fire staff are also trained and can provide on-site interpretation help.
By phone
Call519-741-2345to access interpretation services by phone.For service by phone, staff will add an interpreter in the language of your choice to your call.
Important notice
While more than 200 languages are available for on-demand interpretation support, some are more difficult to provide due to the limited number of interpreters available for these languages. As a result, interpretation for these languages will need to be handled with a scheduled appointment. They include:
AkanBajuniBravaneseDutchEstonianJavaneseKanjobalKibembeMacedonianQ'uiche (Q'eqchi)SangoSaraikiSoninkeSwedishSylhetyTshiluba
Please call519-741-2345orsend us an emailwith your contact information, the language you would like to get service in and a date and time you are available for the call. Service can often be provided same day or within 24 hours. If you want to speak to bylaw staff, pleaseemail our bylaw enforcement divisionwith the same information.
Staff contacts
In ourstaff directory, you can find contact information for city departments and teams.
To learn about our staff structure, visit ourcity departments page.
Contact your city councillor
If you want to contact city council, you canemail all of city councilor your ward's city councillor:
ward one:Councillor Scott Daveyward two:Councillor Dave Schniderward three:Councillor Jason Deneaultward four:Christine Michaudward five:Councillor Ayo Owodunniward six:Councillor Paul Singhward seven:Councillor Bil Ioannidisward eight:Councillor Margaret Johnstonward nine:Councillor Debbie Chapmanward ten:Councillor Stephanie Stretch
Not sure who your city councillor is? Use our online tool to find your ward and councillor.
Find your city councillor
Feedback about city services
Tell us about your experience with us, our processes, decisions, services and staff. We use your feedback to monitor and improve our services for the benefit of all residents.
We try to resolve all complaints but cannot guarantee all complainants will be satisfied with the resolution.
Visit ourfeedback about city services pageto learn more.
Region of Waterloo
Please contact the Region of Waterloo for the topics listed below:
public healthhousingwaste managementtraffic signalspublic transitsocial and community servicesprovincial and regional bylaws
Region of Waterloo contact information
phone:519-575-4400TTY:519-575-4608
Contact the Region of Waterloo
Harm reduction: mental health and substance use
Region of Waterloo Public Health and Emergency Services
phone:519-575-4400TTY:519-575-4608website
Here 24/7 - Addictions, Mental Health & Crisis Services Waterloo-Wellington
One-stop connection to local mental health, addiction, and crisis services agencies.
phone:1-844-437-3247TTY:1-877-688-5501website
Sanguen Health Centre
Ministry of Health funded Hepatitis C agency, providing wrap around support to those experiencing high degrees of marginalization as a result of their substance use, mental health, homelessness, and chronic poverty.
phone:519-603-0223toll free:1-877-351-9857, ext. 1website


Title: View our Find a place to park page
City Hall garage closure
On Tuesday, July 2, 2024, the City Hall parking garage will be closed for approximately five weeks for unavoidable maintenance. As a result of this work, the City Hall parking garage will be closed from July 2 until August 6, 2024.
Visit ourparking in Kitchener pageto learn more.
Downtown parking map
Download ourPDF parking mapto see our parking options and their distance from City Hall.
Parking lots
Open the accordions below to find:
the address of the parking lotcosthoursamenities, including bike parking, electric vehicle charging, accessible parking spots and others
Water Street South (lot 3)Locationaddress:28 Water Street Southlot number: 3enter from: Water Street SouthHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationThese services are available at the Water Street South lot:Communautocar shareaccessible parking spotsbike parkingQueen Street South (lot 7)Locationaddress:5 Charles Street Eastlot number: 7enter from: Queen Street SouthHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, 2 hours maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationCar share and accessible parking spots are available at the Queen Street South lot.Ontario Street South (lot 9)Locationaddress:40 Ontario Street Southlot number: 9enter from: Ontario Street South, Halls Lane or Charles Street WestCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, 2 hours maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots are available at the Ontario Street South lot.Green Street (lot 12)Locationaddress:787 King Street Westlot number: 12enter from: Green StreetHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Sunday, 8 a.m. to midnight: $3 per hour, $14.95 daily maxmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots are available at the Green Street lot.Rotary (lot 13)Locationaddress:828 King Street Westlot number: 13enter from: King Street WestHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Sunday, 8 a.m. to midnight: $3 per hour, $14.95 daily maxmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots are available at the Rotary lot.Otto Street (lot 14)Locationaddress:172 Frederick Streetlot number: 14enter from: Otto StreetHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingCentre in the Square parking: $10, except matinee showsmonthly parking: not availableMore informationAccessible parking spots and bike parking are available at the Otto Street lot.Charles Street West (lot 15)Locationaddress:44-50 Gaukel Streetlot number: 15enter from: Joseph StreetHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots and bike parking are available at the Charles Street West lot.Halls' Lane (lot 16)Locationaddress:28 Halls’ Lane Westlot number: 16enter from: Water Street South, Francis Street SouthHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, 2 hours maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: not availableMore informationAccessible parking spots are available at the Halls' Lane lot.Centre in the Square (Otto Street) (lot 19A)Locationaddress:172 Frederick Streetlot number: 19Aenter from: Otto StreetHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingCentre in the Square parking: $12, except matinee shows (cash only)monthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking is available at the Centre in the Square (Otto Street) lot.Centre in the Square (Queen Street North) (lot 19B)Locationaddress:101 Queen Street Northlot number: 19Benter from: Ahrens Street EastHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 6 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingCentre in the Square parking: $12, except matinee shows (cash only)monthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots are available at the Centre in the Square (Queen Street North) lot.Scott Street (lot 21)Locationaddress:194 King Street Eastlot number: 21enter from: Scott StreetHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, 2 hours maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: not availableTransit (lot 22)Locationaddress:15 Charles Street Westlot number: 22enter from: Charles Street WestHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking is available at the Transit lot.King Street East (lot 23)Locationaddress:201 King Street Eastlot number: 23enter from: King Street East or Halls’ Lane EastHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Friday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, 2 hours maxSaturday and Sunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $145.97 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots and bike parking are available at the King Street East lot.Bramm Street Yards (lot 24)Locationaddress:55 Bramm Streetlot number: 24enter from: Bramm Street (via Victoria Street South) or Park Street SouthHoursMonday to Sunday: 24 hours a dayCostMonday to Saturday, 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.: $2.60 per hour, $13 daily maxmonthly parking: $123.63 plus HST per monthMore informationAccessible parking spots are available at the Bramm Street Yards lot.Eby Street (lot 25)Locationaddress: 25 Eby Streetlot number: 25enter from: Eby StreetHoursMonday to Friday: 8 a.m. to 5 p.m.Saturday, 12:01 a.m. to 5 p.m.: no parking during Kitchener Market activitiesCostfirst hour free (once daily)each extra hour: $2.60, $13 daily max
Parking garages
the address of the parking garagecosthoursamenities, including bike parking, electric vehicle charging, accessible parking spots and others
Charles & BentonLocationaddress:4 Charles Street Eastenter from: Charles Street EastHoursMonday to Saturday: 24 hours a dayCostless than 2 hours: $4each extra 30 minutes: $1.80, $16.20 daily maxSunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $165.75 plus HST per monthGarage clearanceall levels: 6'10"More informationThese services are available in the Charles & Benton parking garage:electric vehicle chargingaccessible parking spotsbike parkingCity HallNOTICE: On Tuesday, July 2, 2024, the City Hall parking garage will be closed for approximately five weeks for unavoidable maintenance. As a result of this work, the City Hall parking garage will be closed from July 2 until August 6, 2024.During this construction, monthly City Hall parking permit holders will be transferred to theDuke & Ontarioparking garage. We will let monthly parking permit holders know when the City Hall parking garage is open.We will also have temporary free 30-minute parking/loading zones on Young and College Streets to accommodate daycare drop-off and pick-up, retail customers and City Hall visitors.Locationaddress:200 King Street Westenter from: Young StreetHoursMonday to Friday: 6:30 a.m. to 10 p.m.weekends and holidays: 7 a.m. to 10 p.m.outside of regular hours: controlled access (registered licence plate or press the help button)Costless than 2 hours: $4each extra 30 minutes: $1.80, $16.20 daily maxmonthly parking: $165.75 plus HST per month, 24-hour accessGarage clearanceall levels: 6'7"More informationThese services are available in the City Hall parking garage:electric vehicle chargingaccessible parking spotsbike parkingCivic DistrictLocationaddress:83 Queen Street Northenter from: Queen Street North or Otto StreetHoursMonday to Thursday: 6 a.m. to 9 p.m.Friday and Saturday: 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.Sunday: free parkingCostfirst 30 minutes: $1.20second 30 minutes: $1.20each extra 30 minutes: $1.80, $16.20 daily maxCentre in the Square parking: $10, except matinee shows (cash only)monthly parking: $165.75 plus HST per monthGarage clearanceP1 level: 9'P2 and P3 levels: 6'11"More informationThese services are available in the Civic District parking garage:electric vehicle chargingaccessible parking spotsbike parkingKitchener MarketLocationaddress:300 King Street Eastenter from: Cedar Street NorthHoursMonday to Friday: 7 a.m. to 7 p.m.Saturday: 6 a.m. to 3 p.m.Costless than 2 hours: $4each extra 30 minutes: $1.80, $16.20 daily maxSaturdays between 7 a.m. and 2 p.m.: freeSunday: closedmonthly parking: $165.75 plus HST per monthGarage clearanceall levels: 7'More informationThese services are available in the Kitchener Market parking garage:electric vehicle chargingaccessible parking spotsbike parkingDuke & OntarioLocationaddress:33 Ontario Street Northenter from: Duke Street WestHoursMonday to Saturday: 24 hours a dayCostless than 2 hours: $4each extra 30 minutes: $1.80, $16.20 daily maxSunday: free parkingmonthly parking: $165.75 plus HST per month general, $184.96 plus HST per month reserved (24/7 access)Garage clearancegeneral: 6'8"reserved: 6'0"More informationThese services are available in the Duke & Ontario parking garage:electric vehicle chargingaccessible parking spotsbike parking
On-street parking
There are more than 300 free, two-hour street parking spaces in downtown Kitchener. You cannot park in an on-street parking space twice within five hours.
Please follow ourparking bylawswhen parking.
Electric vehicle charging
There is an electric vehicle charging station on-street on Francis Street at the corner of Joseph Street.


Title: Living in Kitchener
Quick Links
Births and deathsLinks to provincial resources for birth and death certificates.
Bylaws at homeOur most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Commissioning documentsThe Commissioners for Taking Affidavits Act allows our City Clerk or designate to administer oaths and take affidavits.
Contact usContact information for the City of Kitchener, including phone, email and social media.
In your neighbourhoodNeighbourhood associations, neighbourhood strategy, libraries, gardens and more.
Kitchener CemeteriesVisit the Kitchener Cemeteries website to learn about their services.
Kitchener Fire DepartmentFire services, tips, careers, permits and inspections and emergency planning.
Leaves, snow and garbageLeaf collection, snow removal, garbage, recycling and yard waste collection.
Marriage and divorceLearn about getting married or divorced. Apply for a marriage licence.
Moving to KitchenerResources for moving to the City of Kitchener.
MyKitchenerSign up for MyKitchener account to create a custom dashboard.
Regional courthouseThe regional courthouse is in downtown Kitchener.
Renting in KitchenerRenting a housing unit comes with certain legal protections, as well as certain responsibilities.
Social servicesKitchener Housing, Region of Waterloo, seasonal cooling and warming centres.
How to apply for a marriage licenceStep-by-step guide for applying for a marriage licence in Kitchener.
Births and deaths
Links to provincial resources for birth and death certificates.
Bylaws at home
Our most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Commissioning documents
The Commissioners for Taking Affidavits Act allows our City Clerk or designate to administer oaths and take affidavits.
Contact us
Contact information for the City of Kitchener, including phone, email and social media.
In your neighbourhood
Neighbourhood associations, neighbourhood strategy, libraries, gardens and more.
Kitchener Cemeteries
Visit the Kitchener Cemeteries website to learn about their services.
Kitchener Fire Department
Fire services, tips, careers, permits and inspections and emergency planning.
Leaves, snow and garbage
Leaf collection, snow removal, garbage, recycling and yard waste collection.
Marriage and divorce
Learn about getting married or divorced. Apply for a marriage licence.
Moving to Kitchener
Resources for moving to the City of Kitchener.
MyKitchener
Sign up for MyKitchener account to create a custom dashboard.
Regional courthouse
The regional courthouse is in downtown Kitchener.
Renting in Kitchener
Renting a housing unit comes with certain legal protections, as well as certain responsibilities.
Social services
Kitchener Housing, Region of Waterloo, seasonal cooling and warming centres.
How to apply for a marriage licence
Step-by-step guide for applying for a marriage licence in Kitchener.


Title: View our Neighbourhood development guide page
Questions about a specific property
If you’re curious about what’s happening with a specific property in your neighbourhood, contact the planning division or call 519-741-2426.
Zoning and planning questions
To find out the zoning of an address and learn about what’s permitted on that property, use the onlinezoning mapping tool, call 519-741-2317, contact our planning division, or visit Kitchener City Hall.
Do I need a building permit for my project?
Visit ourbuilding permits pageto see if your project needs a permit.
What determines what can be done on a particular property?
Thezoning bylawdetermines the types of residence allowed on each property in your neighbourhood. Each zone has different requirements, and a property may have different rules than those across the street or next door.
The zoning bylaw regulates:
building setbacks - how close a building can be to your property linelot coverage – how much of the property can be covered by buildingsbuilding height – how tall a building can begarage projection – how far the garage extends from the housedriveway width – how wide a driveway can be
What’s changing in my neighbourhood?
There are two main ways we inform residents about projects in your neighbourhood.
If a project meets all city rules
If a renovation or development meets City bylaws and has been approved, a building permit sign is posted on the building. Neighbours are not involved in these projects as they meet all the rules.
Depending on the renovation or new development, public information may be available to you and you will be made aware of projects happening in your neighbourhood.
You can see all ouractive permitsthrough ouronline services portal.
If a project needs an exception to a city rule
If a project needs permission to change zoning rules or divide the property into two or more properties:
a sign is placed on the propertya notice is placed in the newspaperneighbours are sent a letter
Projects that generally meet the zoning but need an exception to a few minor rules will go through the Committee of Adjustment. Significant changes go through the zoning amendment process.
We make it clear which process a project will follow in our notifications.
Process for zoning amendments
Here are the steps involved with azoning amendment:
property owner submits an application to the citythe public is notified of the applicationa neighbourhood information session is held to inform the public and seek feedbacka newspaper notice is placed and a letter is sent to everyone who asked to be notifieda public meeting is held at a committee of council then council makes a decision.the project is approved or project is refusedanyone may appeal the decision to the Local Planning Appeals Tribunalif approved, a site plan may need to be reviewed by city staffbuilding permitsacquiredproject construction beginsactive applications
Process for committee of adjustment
If a project only needs minor changes to meet its zoning rules, you can apply to thecommittee of adjustment.
Minor variance example
Minor variances are the most common type of exception.
A common example is building a new front porch. You made need a minor variance to allow it to be closer to the front of your property than your zoning allows.
Consent application example
If you want to divide a property into two or more properties, you can apply for a consent application through the committee of adjustment.
Committee of adjustment meetings happen about once a month. Submitting an application doesn’t guarantee approval.
Site plans
Larger projects requiresite plansbefore building permits can be issued. Projects large enough to require site plans include the development of:
triplexestownhousesapartment buildings
Site plans allow staff to review how a project will impact a neighbourhood’s:
lightinggradingparkingtrees
Site plan review is a technical process. It is based on council-approved documents including thezoning bylaw,urban design manualanddevelopment manual. It is not a public process.
What we look for in a site plan
site layoutparking lot layoutlandscape and amenity areasgrading, servicing and stormwater managementbuilding designsite lightinggarbage storage
What other standards does the city have?
We review planning applications using thezoning bylaw,urban design manualanddevelopment manual.
The urban design manual includes guidelines about how to design projects that fit within a neighbourhood such as looking at:
building design and massingroof pitchwindow and door openingsporches
The urban design manual also has standards for:
site lightingparking lot designtree planting and landscapinggarbage storagesite safety and functionality
The urban design manual is not a bylaw. Projects must meet its general intent but may not completely address each guideline.
Thedevelopment manualexplains our rules for stormwater management, lot grading, water and sanitary sewers.


Title: Resources for builders and developers
Quick Links
Building and industry updatesCity updates for the building industry and our annual workshop presentations.
Building standardsEnsuring proposed developments are safe, structurally sound and follow codes.
Demolition controlWe control demolition of buildings to preserve residential units.
Development chargesFees we charge for developments in urban and suburban areas.
Development manualReference documents for developers and builders.
Grants and incentivesApply for a grant to save money on your project or other initiative.
Land development applicationsLinks to development resources to help with your project.
Planning around rapid transit (PARTS)How we're planning the areas around rapid transit stations.
Park dedicationWe ask for land or cash-in-lieu of land using our park dedication bylaw and park dedication policy.
Part-lot controlYou can ask us to pass a part-lot control bylaw.
Plan of condominiumYou need to follow this process to divide a property into condominiums.
Plan of subdivisionMake sure your project aligns with our growth management strategy.
Planning resourcesResources to help you plan your development in Kitchener.
Pre-submission consultationFor some projects, we set up a meeting before you apply for a permit.
Public art for developersWe encourage private and institutional developers to include public art in their projects.
Road occupancy or work permitsYou need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Sanitary or stormwater discharge permitsWe regulate the discharge of water, wastewater and stormwater.
Sanitary and stormwater system alterationsRequest an alteration to our sanitary or stormwater system.
Sign permitsSign guidelines, variance information and current variance requests.
Telecommunication towersInformation about proposed telecommunication towers.
Building and industry updates
City updates for the building industry and our annual workshop presentations.
Building standards
Ensuring proposed developments are safe, structurally sound and follow codes.
Demolition control
We control demolition of buildings to preserve residential units.
Development charges
Fees we charge for developments in urban and suburban areas.
Development manual
Reference documents for developers and builders.
Grants and incentives
Apply for a grant to save money on your project or other initiative.
Land development applications
Links to development resources to help with your project.
Planning around rapid transit (PARTS)
How we're planning the areas around rapid transit stations.
Park dedication
We ask for land or cash-in-lieu of land using our park dedication bylaw and park dedication policy.
Part-lot control
You can ask us to pass a part-lot control bylaw.
Plan of condominium
You need to follow this process to divide a property into condominiums.
Plan of subdivision
Make sure your project aligns with our growth management strategy.
Planning resources
Resources to help you plan your development in Kitchener.
Pre-submission consultation
For some projects, we set up a meeting before you apply for a permit.
Public art for developers
We encourage private and institutional developers to include public art in their projects.
Road occupancy or work permits
You need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Sanitary or stormwater discharge permits
We regulate the discharge of water, wastewater and stormwater.
Sanitary and stormwater system alterations
Request an alteration to our sanitary or stormwater system.
Sign permits
Sign guidelines, variance information and current variance requests.
Telecommunication towers
Information about proposed telecommunication towers.


Title: View our Kitchener in Bloom page
Recognize a garden
The Kitchener in Bloom program celebrates the gardening efforts of residents and business owners who help to make our city a more beautiful place to live.
Between now and September, we invite you to recognize all types of gardens that make Kitchener greener, more vibrant and more sustainable.
Thank a neighbour for making the most of their outdoor space and helping to grow community pride by filling out our online form.
Types of gardens
We want to know about all types of gardening, including:
balcony gardenscommunity gardenscontainer gardensfairy gardensflower gardenspollinator patchesrain gardensraised gardensrock gardens
Virtual classes
We hosted a series of virtual gardening classes on Facebook Live. In these classes, gardening experts shared tips for preparing your garden, cooking what you grow and more.
Watch past classes on Facebook
Garden finder map
Check out ourgarden finder mapfor gardening inspiration or to find greenspaces in your neighbourhood to add to your next walk or bike ride.
Add your own garden to our mapif you were recognized by Kitchener in Bloom or if you want to share your garden on our map. You can also add a public garden or other greenspace you want people to see! Include a picture and description to make the map even better.
Add a garden to the map
Adding a garden to our garden finder map is not a Kitchener in Bloom recognition. Findrecognition informationabove.
Sponsor
We're thankful for the support ofECU - A Division of WFCU Credit Unionfor the 2024 Kitchener in Bloom program.


Title: View our How to report a problem or make a bylaw complaint page



Title: View our Sign permits page
Sign bylaw
Oursign bylawregulates the location and sizes of signs installed in the city. Our guidelines ensure signs are safely installed and won’t impede visibility.
Permanent signs
If you want to install a permanent sign, please read our submission requirements before submitting apermanent sign permit application.
If your sign does not follow these submission requirements, you will need to get an exemption by requesting a variance.
A professional engineer must design permanent signs when they:
project from a building and weigh more than 25 kg or 55 lbsare freestanding and taller than 1.8 metres or 5.9 feet above ground
Portable signs
Portable signs may only be placed in approved locations. A maximum of six permits may be issued for any one business or use per calendar year. To apply for a permit, complete ourportable sign permit application.
Send us an emailif the subject property does not have a valid sign location and you want to apply for one.
Temporary signs
You can receive a temporary permit for inflatable signs and banners. There is a maximum of six permits a year for a business or specific use.
To apply for a permit, complete atemporary sign permit application.
Variance requests
If your sign doesn’t meet our bylaw requirements, you’ll need to request a variance. The variance process is:
apply for a variance (download the application form) and pay the feea notice of application will be posted on our websiteproperty owners within 120 metre radius receive written notice of the request and can provide commentsplanning staff will circulate the application for feedback from other departments deemed relevant
After you apply for and receive a variance, you will need to apply for and obtain a sign permit.
Variance approval
Approval may be subject to conditions determined by staff. If staff do not support the application, you can appeal staff’s recommendation to city council.
If the variance is considered minor and there are no concerns, the process will take approximately four weeks to complete.
If in the variance request is worthy of consideration but not minor, the application will be processed as a bylaw amendment that would be considered by city council.
Sign variance requests under review
These sign variance requests are currently under review:
April 18, 2024 -130 Weber Street West
Report an illegal sign
If you see a sign that doesn't comply with oursign bylaw, you canreport it online.Report an illegal sign


Title: View our Renting in Kitchener page
What renters need to know
When you rent a housing unit, you are considered a tenant. As a tenant, you have legal rights that provide you with basic levels of protection.  On this page, you will find information to help you understand your rights and resources to help you navigate any issues that may arise during your tenancy.
This webpage is not intended to be a complete list of resources but will be updated with additional information and resources as they become available.
The information on this page is not legal advice. If you require more detailed information about the law, contact theLandlord and Tenant Board(LTB) or one of the legal resources listed below.
Residential Tenancies Act
TheResidential Tenancies Act(RTA) is the legislation that governs the landlord-tenant relationship in Ontario. It outlines the rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants and provides rules for rent increases, evictions and maintenance orders. Please also see theGuide to the RTA.
The RTA is the responsibility of the Province of Ontario. We do not enforce the RTA. If you believe your landlord has broken any of the rules of the RTA, contact theRental Housing Enforcement Unit(RHEU) for help.
The Landlord and Tenant Board
TheLandlord and Tenant Board(LTB) is an independent adjudicative tribunal that resolves disputes between landlords and tenants in Ontario and enforces the Residential Tenancies Act. They provide information on the Residential Tenancies Act and can help tenants and landlords understand their rights and responsibilities. The Board also hears applications from tenants and landlords on issues such as rent increases, eviction notices and maintenance.
The LTB'sInformation for New Tenants brochureprovides helpful information for new tenants.
We do not participate in the Landlord and Tenant Board. This a provincial matter.
Evictions
The Residential Tenancies Act allows a landlord to evict you (end your tenancy) for several reasons. A landlord can only end a tenancy for the reasons allowed by the Act.
The first step is for your landlord to give you a notice in writing that they want you to move out. Your landlord must use the proper form provided by the LTB and the form must give the reason for the eviction.
You are not required to move out upon receiving a notice from your landlord. Your landlord must apply for and receive an eviction order from the LTB. Only the LTB can authorize an eviction. The eviction order provided by the LTB will indicate your termination date (when you must vacate your rental unit).
The LTB'sInformation for New Tenants brochureprovides more information on the rules for how a landlord can end a tenancy and evict a tenant.
Online eviction survey
As part of ourRental Housing, Eviction and Displacement Study, we are collecting information from (people who have been or are being displaced) tenants who have been or will be evicted from their rental units because of the landlord’s intent to demolish, renovate, convert or occupy their rental unit.
Pleasecomplete this surveyif your landlord asked you to move out because:
your landlord wants to demolish your rental unityour landlord wants to renovate your rental unityour landlord wants to convert your rental unit to a non-residential useyour landlord, a purchaser or a family member wants to move into your rental unitother reasons
The information you provide will help inform our understanding of the nature and magnitude of evictions and displacements occurring in Kitchener. The information collected through this survey is confidential and will only be accessible to authorized city staff.
Property standards
Although the RTA and the LTB are administered and enforced by the province, we have standards on property maintenance and occupancy that all properties, including rentals, must meet. Theseproperty standardsare outlined in ourMunicipal Code. If you have concerns that your rental unit does not meet property standards, inform your landlord or property manager in writing first and keep a copy of this letter for your records. If your concerns are not resolved within a reasonable amount of time, you canfile a property standards complaint.
Fire inspections
If you are concerned about the safety of your rental unit, please contactKitchener Fireand request an inspection. Every residential unit must have working smoke alarms. It is the owner’s responsibility to provide smoke alarms. Smoke alarms should not be removed unless they require replacement. If replacement is required, they must be replaced immediately. Smoke alarms save lives. Other fire safety requirements may apply.
It is a requirement of Ontario Fire Departments to respond to all complaints or requests for inspection underOntario Regulation 365/13.
Community supports
Community legal clinics provide free or low-cost information, legal advice and representation to tenants encountering issues with their landlords such maintenance issues. They can also help you navigate eviction notices and rent increases and provide information on your legal rights as a tenant and the options available to you.
There are provincial and local resources and groups that can help:
Waterloo Region Community Legal ServicesLutherwood Housing SupportSocial Development Centre Waterloo RegionCommunity Legal Education OntarioKitchener Housing
There are other community supports available including:
The Working CentreCanadian Mental Health Association (CMHA)theKitchener Downtown Community Health Centreat 44 Francis Street (Tannery) offers support in obtaining personal identification documents (ID)Here 27/7provide addictions, mental health and crisis services in Waterloo Wellington
Region of Waterloo resources
The Region of Waterloo oversees affordable housing in the Region and has additional information available on their website:
Housing and ShelterHousing ServicesFind Affordable Housing


Title: Parking
Quick Links
Parking in KitchenerLearn about parking options in Kitchener, including paying for hourly parking from your phone.
Find a place to parkFind hourly or monthly parking downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for monthly parkingMonthly parking permits are available downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for hourly parkingYou can pay for hourly or daily parking from your phone or a kiosk.
Parking and non-parking ticketsPay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bike parkingPark your bike for free in one of our secure parking garages to keep it safe.
Overnight parking exemptionsRequest a parking exemption to park overnight between December 1 and March 31.
Parking bylawsOur parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
GuidesGuides related to parking in the City of Kitchener.
Parking in Kitchener
Learn about parking options in Kitchener, including paying for hourly parking from your phone.
Find a place to park
Find hourly or monthly parking downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for monthly parking
Monthly parking permits are available downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for hourly parking
You can pay for hourly or daily parking from your phone or a kiosk.
Parking and non-parking tickets
Pay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bike parking
Park your bike for free in one of our secure parking garages to keep it safe.
Overnight parking exemptions
Request a parking exemption to park overnight between December 1 and March 31.
Parking bylaws
Our parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Guides
Guides related to parking in the City of Kitchener.


Title: View our Façade grant program page
About the grant program
We offer grants to eligible downtown property owners and tenants who want to make street-facing building façade improvements.
We only consider proposals that offer:
high-quality storefront and façade designhigh quality signagepreservation and enhancement of upper-storey façadesupgrades to exterior accessibility upgrades that meet AODA standardshigh community and streetscape impact
Application
Applications for the façade grant program are open. We accept applications on a rolling basis.
Apply online
Eligibility
To be eligible for a grant, a property must be located within the Downtown Community Improvement Area, with commercial (retail, restaurant or dining, services) uses on the ground floor.
Each grant application must:
satisfy oururban design guidelinesand our King Street façade guidelines (send us an emailto download a copy)follow oursign bylawand theOntario Building Code
If the total value of all grant applications exceeds the amount of funding available, the applications will be rated based on predetermined criteria. A selection committee will be formed to support the decision-making process. The applications that receive the highest scores will be eligible to receive a grant.
All successful grant applications will also be subject to the terms and conditions of ourDowntown Community Improvement Plan.
Eligible work
You can use your façade improvement grant in these ways:
repainting, cleaning or re-facing of façadesrepair or restoration of façade masonry, brickwork or woodreplacement, repair or restoration of cornices, eaves, parapets and other featuresreplacement or repair of windowsentrance modifications that improve the appearance and/or access to the commercial unitsredesign and reconstruction of the store frontinstallation of appropriate new signage or improvements to existing signageinstallation or repair of canopies and awningsinstallation or repair of exterior lightingrestoration of historic featuresenhance accessibility features that meet AODA standards
Funding
Our façade improvement grants are subject to funding availability and issued upon the completion of the proposed work.
If your grant application is approved, we may pay up to half (50%) of the total cost of your project.
Eligible downtown property owners and merchants/business owners are eligible to receive grants of up to $10,000 per street address or storefront. A property or storefront cannot receive more than $10,000 under this program within a five-year period.
Buildings with multiple storefronts or street addresses are eligible for grants of up to $30,000. Buildings on corner lots, where façade improvements are proposed on both frontages, are eligible for grants of up to $20,000.
A maximum of 10% of the façade grant may be used toward soft costs, such as design fees. No building fees will be reimbursed in this round of funding.


Title: View our Growing Together page
About the project
Growing Together will update the planning framework for Kitchener's Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) through land use policies and zoning regulations. This will ensure that our growing MTSAs can continue to grow responsibly for many years to come.
The Growing Together project builds upon previous work done with the community (through the PARTS and Neighbourhood Planning Review projects) while also responding to new direction from the province, implementing the updated Regional Official Plan, and addressing new and emerging city priorities.
Kitchener’s MTSAs are defined by the Region of Waterloo and are subject to new policies at both the provincial and regional level. Growing Together will implement these policies and help us create a city for everyone.
Get involved
We're hosting a series of casual events that explore, in a hands-on way, how growth and change are happening in our community.
Look for us around Kitchener, whether you're at the library picking up a book or at a community centre for a program. Visitour Engage Kitchener pageto find an event.
Learn more on Engage Kitchener
Neighbourhood planning reviews
The Growing Together project is the continuation of our ongoing planning review process that began with PARTS and advanced through the Neighbourhood Planning Review (NPR) project.
Learn more about these projects:
Cedar Hill and Schneider CreekCivic CentreKing Street EastK-W Hospital/MidtownMill Courtland Woodside Park/RockwayVictoria ParkVictoria StreetPlanning Around Rapid Transit Stations (PARTS)


Title: View our Committee of adjustment page
About the committee
Under the Provincial Planning Act, the committee can:
grant minor variances from our zoning bylawallow changes to legal, non-conforming uses that current zoning does not permitgive consent for land severance to divide a parcel of land into more than one lot, or as lot additions to abutting propertiesgive consent to mortgages, partial discharge of mortgages and validation of titlegive consent to leases over 21 years, quit claims, easements and rights-of-way
There are five members appointed to the Committee of Adjustment and it is anticipated that all five members are present at each meeting. All decisions must be made in public.
Minor variances
All development proposals must follow our zoning bylaw, which sets out detailed requirements dealing with the use of land and buildings, including building setbacks.
Where a project design or lot size/shape makes it impossible to follow the zoning bylaw, the committee may consider a variation from the rules, called a minor variance.
Example: reducing the required setback from the rear property line for a deck.
Consents
Where land division by a plan of subdivision is unnecessary, or where a lot line is being adjusted, the Planning Act allows the consent granting process.
This usually involves a land severance (dividing parcels of land into 2 or more new lots or as lot additions to abutting properties) or the establishment of a right-of-way, easement, lease or validation of title.
Apply
Download the right application form:
minor varianceconsents or validation of title(fee is per lot or block to be created)change of conditions to a provisional consentcertificate of official – steps to obtain deed endorsement
Send us an emailor call519-741-2426if you have any questions about the application form.
You canbook an appointmentat City Hall for commissioning services for the affidavit section of your application form.
Send your completed applicationby email(maximum 10 MB).
After sending the application by email, send the original, signed application and cheque payable to the City of Kitchener by mail or courier to:
Committee of Adjustment CoordinatorCity of Kitchener – Planning Division200 King Street West, 6thfloorP.O. Box 1118Kitchener, ONN2G 4G7
Find thecommittee meeting dates and deadlines.
Cost
These fees apply to all applications to go before the committee of adjustment:
minor zoning variance small: $1,665minor zoning variance large: $2,871consent: $2,871change of conditions of a provisional consent: $1,975certificate of official: $300deferral fee: $470
Regional and conservation fees
The Region of Waterloo and/or Grand River Conservation Authority (GRCA) may collect other fees to process your application. Failure to pay these fees may delay or stop your application from moving forward.
You can send these fees as separate cheques payable to the region and/or GRCA, along with your application form. We will send your cheques on your behalf.
Deferral fees
An application to the Committee of Adjustment may incur a deferral fee for instances where:
notice requirements outlined within the Planning Act have not been satisfied and further notice would be neededapplicants/agents do not attend two or more consecutive meetingsamendments are needed to the subject application and further notification is neededan application is deferred beyond three monthsan applicant/agent requests a deferral of the application
The fee is only to cover the costs associated with publishing notices in the local newspaper and courtesy neighbourhood mailings. You must pay the fee before your application is rescheduled. The determination of the necessity for a new/updated notice is at the discretion of staff to ensure compliance with notice requirements under the Planning Act.
Committee of Adjustment processThis is what happens after you submit your application to the Committee of Adjustment.Completed application.Notice and circulationAfter we get a complete application, we:circulate complete applications to various city staff and external agencies for commentpost a notice in the Waterloo Region Recordmail a courtesy notice to nearby property ownersapplicants will also need to post signs on the subject propertyBefore each public meeting, we post notices and the committee agenda on committee calendar under the meeting date.Public meeting and committee decisionIf your application is complete, you will be on the agenda for the next available meeting date. If your application is not complete, staff will tell you what you need to fix before applying again.At the meeting, the committee makes their decision on each item and shares that decision.After the meeting, you will get a written decision in the mail. We mail the decision 10 days after the meeting.The committee’s decision isn’t final until the appeal period has passed.Complete conditionsIf the committee imposed any conditions on your application, you must complete them before obtaining:a building permita certificate of consent (must be complete within two years of the decision being mailed)
Appeals
Under Section 45 (12) of the Planning Act and Bill 23-More Homes Built Faster Act, only the applicant, Minister, specified person or public body that has an interest in the matter has the right to appeal this decision to the Ontario Land Tribunal (OLT).
Any person or public body that has an interest in the matter but is not the applicant or defined as a “specified person” or “public body” in section 1 of the Planning Act cannot appeal decisions of the Committee of Adjustment.
Visit their website to find:
the OLT processany relevant forms
Meeting dates
Application deadline for digital submission (5 p.m.)Original hard copy and payment due (5 p.m.)Meeting dateFriday, October 27, 2023Friday, November 3, 2023Tuesday, December 12, 2023Friday, December 1, 2023Friday, December 8, 2023Tuesday, January 16, 2024Friday, January 5, 2024Friday, January 12, 2024Tuesday, February 20, 2024Friday, February 2, 2024Friday, February 9, 2024Tuesday, March 19, 2024Friday, March 1, 2024Friday, March 8, 2024Tuesday, April 16, 2024Friday, April 5, 2024Friday, April 12, 2024Tuesday, May 21, 2024Friday, May 3, 2024Friday, May 10, 2024Tuesday, June 18, 2024Friday, May 31, 2024Friday, June 7, 2024Tuesday, July 16, 2024Friday, July 5, 2024Friday, July 12, 2024Tuesday, August 20, 2024Friday, August 2, 2024Friday, August 9, 2024Tuesday, September 17, 2024Friday, August 30, 2024Friday, September 6, 2024Tuesday, October 15, 2024Friday, October 4, 2024Friday, October 11, 2024Tuesday, November 19, 2024Friday, October 25, 2024Friday, November 1, 2024Tuesday, December 10, 2024
Map of applications
Use our interactive map to search for committee of adjustment applications in Kitchener. This map includes applications since 2002. Older applications may have incomplete data.
Open the map


Title: View our Grants and incentives page
Quick Links
Affordable housing incentivesCouncil policies to encourage developing new affordable rental housing units.
Bloomberg Youth Climate Action FundWe've joined Bloomberg Philanthropies' new Youth Climate Action Fund.
Brownfield incentive programRenewal and revitalization of former manufacturing and historic properties.
Community Development Infrastructure ProgramA grant for groups to address issues they have found in their communities.
Community grantsFinancial opportunities for not-for-profit and community organizations.
Façade grant programFinancial incentive for eligible downtown businesses to improve their façades.
Facility grantsSave money on the cost of hosting an event at a city-run facility.
Heritage fundingInformation and resources about properties eligible to apply for funding.
LoveMyHood matching grantGrant that supports resident-led projects in our neighbourhoods.
RISE Fund: Racialized and Indigenous Supports for EquityA grant for Black, Indigenous and racialized groups and organizations.
Startup grant programGrant program for property owners of underused downtown spaces for startups.
Travel assistance grantReduce the cost of out-of-town trips to sports tournaments and events.
Youth summer employment supportYou could qualify for up to $300 to help cover costs preventing you from applying for a summer job with us.
Affordable housing incentives
Council policies to encourage developing new affordable rental housing units.
Bloomberg Youth Climate Action Fund
We've joined Bloomberg Philanthropies' new Youth Climate Action Fund.
Brownfield incentive program
Renewal and revitalization of former manufacturing and historic properties.
Community Development Infrastructure Program
A grant for groups to address issues they have found in their communities.
Community grants
Financial opportunities for not-for-profit and community organizations.
Façade grant program
Financial incentive for eligible downtown businesses to improve their façades.
Facility grants
Save money on the cost of hosting an event at a city-run facility.
Heritage funding
Information and resources about properties eligible to apply for funding.
LoveMyHood matching grant
Grant that supports resident-led projects in our neighbourhoods.
RISE Fund: Racialized and Indigenous Supports for Equity
A grant for Black, Indigenous and racialized groups and organizations.
Startup grant program
Grant program for property owners of underused downtown spaces for startups.
Travel assistance grant
Reduce the cost of out-of-town trips to sports tournaments and events.
Youth summer employment support
You could qualify for up to $300 to help cover costs preventing you from applying for a summer job with us.


Title: View our Stormwater management page
How we manage stormwater
Stormwater is managed in three ways:
property-specific things like rain barrels, downspouts and cisternsconveying stormwater with storm drains and sewersend-of-pipe collection systems like stormwater management ponds
By collecting water and soaking up rain we can ensure less water flows over paved areas. This reduces the amount of oil and dirt that ends up in our lakes and ponds.
We can use the water we capture for our own purposes or to simply let the ground soak it up naturally.
Manage your home’s stormwater
You can help manage the amount of runoff coming from your home by:
using a rain barrel to collect water for your gardendisposing of hazardous products like motor oil, antifreeze, etc., by dropping them off at our local waste management facilitywashing your car at a car wash, instead of your drivewaysweeping dirt from your sidewalks and driveways and putting the debris in the garbage, instead of on the roadpicking up pet waste regularlyreducing the use of salt for ice melting during the winterensuring your downspouts drain onto your lawn or garden areas, not directly onto driveways, sidewalks or streets
Stormwater ponds aren’t for skating
In the winter, stormwater ponds may seem like a great place to skate or play hockey but they are extremely unsafe.
Water is constantly flowing into and draining out of these ponds, and they often pick up some of the deicing chemicals used on roads. This means that ice could be safe one moment and completely unsafe another.
For that reason, no swimming, skating or recreational use of any kind is allowed on our stormwater management ponds. Signs at each pond clearly indicate this. Watchthis short videoto learn more about stormwater ponds
If you’re looking for somewhere to skate, find the closestoutdoor skating rink.
Spring melt
A quick increase in temperature during the spring can cause ice to melt rapidly, causing localized flooding.
Watchthis short videoto learn about how you can prepare for the next spring melt.
You can reduce this risk around your home by:
clearing snow buildup around your home’s foundation and window wellsensuring snow, ice and debris is clear from your roof and eavestroughsremoving snow and ice at the end of downspoutsensuring downspouts drain at least one metre away from your foundation and onto your lawn or garden areas, rather than directly onto sidewalks or streetsshovelling snow and ice onto your yard, not onto the road, to avoid blocking drainswatching for standing water around your home’s foundationif you have a sump pump, cycle it at least once a month and clean the sump basin annually
If you notice blocked catch basins on your street, call us at 519-741-2345.
Stormwater report card
Every five years we assess our stormwater management system and create a report card summarizing our findings.
The most recent report card was developed in 2018, using data from 2011-2015. Read the currentreport card.
Send us an emailto download a copy of:
the underlying technical report for the 2018 report cardearlier report cards (2006 and 2010)
Disaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF)
From 2018 to 2028, the City of Kitchener is receiving $49.99 million in funding from the federal government for theDisaster Mitigation and Adaptation Fund (DMAF).
This partnership will help enhance the City of Kitchener’s ability to invest in important stormwater management initiatives that will:
help to mitigate the severity of local floodinghelp to protect the environment, homes and businesseshelp to maintain drinking water quality
Why DMAF is important
OurCorporate Climate Action Planis a commitment to mitigate and adapt to climate change.
75% of urban areas in Kitchener lack adequate stormwater management that helps to protect against flooding. Recent flooding events at the Walter Bean Trail and Kiwanis Park highlight the need for action. Now more than ever, our community needs to adapt to frequent and intensifying weather events caused by climate change.
This funding will implement important stormwater management initiatives that will help to mitigate the severity of local flooding that impacts drinking water quality, the environment, personal and business income and municipal infrastructure and services.
Watch the video below to learn about how we're strengthening our stormwater management system.
Where funding will go
DMAF funding will help advance work on the projects in the accordions below.
Water Infrastructure ProgramThese projects make up the largest component of the overall DMAF project, including about 50% of the total projects.Goal: incorporatelow impact development (LID)/green infrastructure techniquesat the same time as primary road reconstruction and replacement of outdated stormwater infrastructure.Implementation: 2020 to 2027Current project:Road Reconstruction projectsCreek ErosionThese projects have been selected after assessing more than 80 km of watercourses and considering factors like:the risks to the environmentpublic health and safetythe likelihood for further erosion to degrade critical infrastructureGoal: address the highest priority creek erosion sites identified through theIntegrated Stormwater Management Master Plan.Implementation: 2020 to 2027Current projects:Renaturalizing Shoemaker Greenway ParkRestoring Local Creeks: North Strasburg CreekRestoring Local Creeks: Voisin Creek and Borden CreekNew Stormwater Management Facility Network ExpansionThese projects will develop new stormwater management facilities in identified areas of the city.Goal: address the needs of existing built-up municipal areas that currently do not have any stormwater controls.Implementation: 2023 to 2027Current projects:Your Cherry Park, your watershedYour Countryside Park, your watershedHelp shape the future of Country Hills ParkYour Idlewood Greenway, your watershedHelp shape the future of Millwood Park and Carlyle ParkYour Meadowlane Park, your watershedShape the Future of Prospect ParkBridgeport DikeIn partnership with theGrand River Conservation Authority, this work will upgrade and repair the existing Bridgeport Dike which is approximately 40 years old.Goal: significantly upgrade and repair the existing dike to address the impacts of major flood events along the Grand River and to bring the infrastructure up to current safety and operational standards.Implementation: 2022 to 2024Current project:Bridgeport Dike Rehabilitation and Capacity Improvement Class Environmental AssessmentWalter Bean TrailThis project element will help repair and connect aspects of the Walter Bean Trail that are currently not passable following flood and ice impacts.Goal: address issues associated with regular flooding and damages which damage a popular section of the trail along the Grand River.Implementation: 2022 to 2024Stream NaturalizationThis project element will proceed through a full Environmental Assessment and include natural channel design, a method of restoring a stream by engineering changes to mimic natural conditions.Goal:removal of existing infrastructure from the floodway in areas with concrete lined channels, followed by natural channel design to restore the system to a functional floodplain.Implementation:2023 to 2027
Return on investment
For every dollar spent by Kitchener ratepayers through the stormwater rate on their water bill, our community is projected to receive a return of $18 in prevented damage costs.
This page will be updated throughout the DMAF project. Subscribe to this page to get an email when we share updates.


Title: View our Additional dwelling units page
About dwelling units
Under zoning bylaw 2019-051, a dwelling unit is a room or suite of habitable rooms that:
is in a residential or mixed-use buildingis occupied or designed to be occupied by a household as a single, independent and separate housekeeping establishmenthas both a kitchen and bathroom used or designed to be used for the exclusive common use of its occupantshas a private entrance directly from the outside of the building or a common hallway or stairway inside the building
The process on this page applies to residential buildings with two to four total residential dwelling units.
Visit these pages for information about:
residential buildings with five to 10 total units and no other uses:residential dwelling unitsbuildings or properties with five to 10 residential dwelling units and non-residential uses:site plans
Zoning
Our zoning bylaw allows for additional dwelling units (ADUs) on residential-zone properties with adequate services if the project meets our zoning bylaw.
To find out which zoning bylaw currently applies to your property and how it is zoned, enter the address into ouronline zoning map. If you have any questions, call us at519-741-2426orsend us an email.
Types of additional dwelling units
There are different combinations of additional dwelling units (ADUs) you can build on your residential property in association with a single detached dwelling, a semi-detached dwelling unit or a street townhouse dwelling unit. In all cases, the maximum number of units permitted on a lot is four. You can combine units in different ways, including:
one Additional Dwelling Unit (attached): also known as a duplex, secondary suite, basement apartment or in-law suite, build one attached unit to have a total of two units on your propertytwo Additional Dwelling Units (attached): also known as a triplex, build two attached units to have a total of three units on your propertythree Additional Dwelling Units (attached):also known as a fourplex, build three attached units to have a total of four units on your propertyAdditional Dwelling Unit (detached): you can build a maximum of one detached dwelling, also called a tiny house or backyard homecombination: you can combine both types of units for a total of four units on a lot, and your backyard home can have up to two units
Application process
The application process for additional dwelling units has two parts:
zoning confirmationbuilding permit
If you have any questions, pleasesend us an emailor call519-741-2317.
Zoning confirmation
To confirm that your property is zoned for additional dwelling units, you must request azoning (occupancy) certificate.
You do not need a zoning (occupancy) certificate for one attached unit (duplex or basement apartment).
In your application, you must include:
completed application formproperty surveyzoning plan (fully dimensioned, showing the property lines, existing and proposed buildings, building setbacks and parking spaces)fully dimensioned floor plans indicating all the uses of the spaceselevation drawingsexisting building drawings
Building permit
Visit ourresidential building permits pagefor requirements and application information.
Resources
These resources may help with your project:
official planzoning bylawdevelopment manualurban design manualheritage permits and guidelinesemergency service policytree management policy


Title: View our Development charges page
How we set development charges
The fees we charge are regulated byOntario's Development Charges Act, a set of guidelines every municipality in the province must follow.
We conduct a background study on every new development to determine the fees we'll charge. Each study includes:
a forecast of the number, type and location of planned housing units, population and non-residential development expected in the citythe average capital service levels we've provided over the previous 10 yearsfuture capital projects, which includes analyzing gross expenditures, funding sources and net expenditures that we've either incurred or will incur, to support the expected development
For more information, read the2022 Development Charges Background Studyand the2022 Development Charges Bylaw.
Bill 108
Please see theBill 108 letter from our building divisionfor information on:
deferral of development chargesfreezing of development charges
Central neighbourhood rates
Open a map of the central neighbourhood areas
Please note that these charges are subject to change. Reference the 2022 bylaw for clarification.
Rates for permits issued after June 6, 2024Residentialsingle detached or semi-detached dwelling: $19,484 per dwelling unittownhouse or row dwelling: $13,684 per dwelling unitmultiple dwelling (condo): $9,851 per dwelling unitlodging house: $5,535 per dwelling unitResidential rental units - multiple dwellingThe rates for the rental housing development (development for a building or structure with four or more dwelling units all of which are intended for use as rented residential premises), are reduced as per the following:residential unit with three or more bedrooms reduced by 25%: $7,388residential unit with two bedrooms reduced by 20%: $7,881residential unit with one bedroom or bachelor units reduced by 15%: $8,373Non-residential$29.41 per square metre of gross floor area of building or $2.73 per square foot
Suburban rates
Open a map of the suburban area
Rates for permits issued after June 6, 2024Full services residentialsingle detached/semi-detached/duplex dwelling: $29,009 per dwelling unittownhouse or row dwelling: $20,373 per dwelling unitmultiple dwelling (condo): $14,667 per dwelling unitlodging house: $8,242 per lodging unitResidential rental units - multiple dwellingThe rates for the rental housing development (development for a building or structure with four or more dwelling units all of which are intended for use as rented residential premises), are reduced as per the following:residential unit with three or more bedrooms reduced by 25%: $11,000residential unit with two bedrooms reduced by 20%: $11,734residential unit with one bedroom or bachelor units reduced by 15%: $12,467Partial services residential (no sanitary sewer services)single detached/semi-detached/duplex dwelling: $23,930 per dwelling unittownhouse or row dwelling: $16,806 per dwelling unitmultiple dwelling (condo): $12,100 per dwelling unitlodging house: $6,799 per lodging unitPartial services residential (no sanitary sewer services) rental units - multiple dwellingThe rates for the rental housing development (development for a building or structure with four or more dwelling units all of which are intended for use as rented residential premises), are reduced as per the following:residential unit with three or more bedrooms reduced by 25%: $9,075residential unit with two bedrooms reduced by 20%: $9,680residential unit with one bedroom or bachelor units reduced by 15%: $10,285Partial services residential (no sanitary sewer or water services)single detached/semi-detached/duplex dwelling: $23,431 per dwelling unittownhouse or row dwelling: $16,456 per dwelling unitmultiple or duplex dwelling: $11,847 per dwelling unitlodging house: $6,657 per lodging unitNon-residential developmentAll non-residential costs are based on the gross floor area of the building.full services: $88.85 per square metre or $8.25 per square footpartial services with no sanitary sewer services: $56.95 per square metre or $5.29 per square footpartial services with no sanitary sewer or water services: $53.80 per square metre or $5 per square foot
Other charges
Other local organizations also charge development fees:
Waterloo Regional District School Boardrates varyWaterloo Catholic District School Boardrates varyRegion of Waterloorates vary, call Region of Waterloo staff at 519-575-4400 for more information
How to pay your fees
We collect payment of all development charges, including fees charged by the Region of Waterloo and the school boards, when we issue your building permit.
The rates charged are the rates in effect the day the building permit is issued, unless noted otherwise in the Development Charges Act.
Development charge annual statements
In accordance with the Development Charges Act section 43(2.1)(a), these development charge statements are available for download:
20222021202020192018


Title: View our Maps page
Interactive mapping
Explore Kitchener from the comfort of your own home or office using our interactive mapping tool.
This application (app) lets you view data about Kitchener in map form, generated by our geographical information system (GIS). The app uses information from various sources and creates map layers for you to view and print out.
By using our app, you can find:
active building permitszoningtraffic closuresaerial imageryengineering drawingcity-owned infrastructure (water, sanitary and storm)trails and bikewaysparksplanning informationand more!
Open the map content on the left side of the application and explore further by turning the layers on or off. The 'i' tool will open windows with more information about a layer, based on where you clicked the mouse.
Open our interactive mapping app
If you need some help, check out thequick reference guideorsend us an email.
Paper maps
If you need a map of Kitchener, we can help. Visit our GeoHub todownload a PDF map. Some popular maps include:
downtown Kitchener districtsneighbourhood associationsplanning communitiesward boundariesWaterloo Regionwards with street indexKitchener street indexstreet index with zoning (zoning boundaries)
If you’re looking for a map not listed above,send us an email.
Story maps
Learn about Kitchener and its history by exploring a story map on our open data portal. These maps can help you uncover something new and link points of interest together.
Check out our story maps:
Explore Kitchener's population and households through theDemographic StoriesStory Map.Kitchener'sCorporate Climate Action Plan Story Mapwas a part of THEMUSEUM's ALARM exhibit.Check out ourWhat's in my 'hood Story Mapto find places, resources and points of interest that are close to you.Kitchener's Urban Forestry Story Maphighlights city trees at various levels of geography. Learn about the types of trees in your neighbourhood.Use ourParks story mapto find a local park or trail.The Investing inInfrastructure Story Mapshows how investing in water infrastructure helps ensure service is reliable.ThePlanning Story Mapcatalogue contains a collection of Story Maps pertaining to planning topics.
Story maps require a Google Chrome, Safari or Firefox internet browser. The system is not compatible with Internet Explorer.
Subscribe to this page to get an email when we add a new story map.
Find a park, trail or other city property
Use ourfacilities toolto find a pool, park or community centre near you. This tool uses our GIS data with quick links to Google Maps for directions on the go.


Title: Building permits
Quick Links
Apply for a building permitApplication process for residential and ICI building permits.
Residential building permitsGet a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
ICI building permitsIndustrial, commercial and institutional building permit information.
Miscellaneous permits and applicationsLearn about our building permits and what you need to include in your application.
Building applications and standard formsApplication, standard and inspection forms you may need to get a building permit.
Building permit feesPermit fees, payment information and more information.
Standard details and guidesList of links to help you obtain your building permit as quickly as possible.
Active permits and interactive mappingThe latest mapping and information on your active building permits online.
Building and industry updatesUpdates to the building industry and copies of our annual workshops.
Building requestsFile a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.
Online services portalCheck the status of your building permit and schedule inspections.
Apply for a building permit
Application process for residential and ICI building permits.
Residential building permits
Get a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
ICI building permits
Industrial, commercial and institutional building permit information.
Miscellaneous permits and applications
Learn about our building permits and what you need to include in your application.
Building applications and standard forms
Application, standard and inspection forms you may need to get a building permit.
Building permit fees
Permit fees, payment information and more information.
Standard details and guides
List of links to help you obtain your building permit as quickly as possible.
Active permits and interactive mapping
The latest mapping and information on your active building permits online.
Building and industry updates
Updates to the building industry and copies of our annual workshops.
Building requests
File a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.
Online services portal
Check the status of your building permit and schedule inspections.


Title: View our Senior of the year page
Nominate a senior
Nominations for the 2025 Senior of the Year are open now.
Nominate a senior online
If you prefer a paper nomination form, please visit one of ourcommunity centresorpools. You can also call519-741-2200, ext. 5345orsend us an email.
If the senior you know lives in Waterloo, visittheir websiteto nominate them.
Nomination criteria
Nominees must:
be 65 years of age or olderbe a current resident of Kitchenernot be a current member of the Mayor's Advisory Council for Kitchener Seniors (MACKS)be an individual (you cannot nominate couples or groups)give permission to be nominated and agree to submission information
Selection process
Nominations will be reviewed by a panel made up of:
volunteers from the Mayor's Advisory Council for Kitchener Seniors (MACKS)members of councilstaff members
Recognition activities
Mayor Berry Vrbanovic will announce the recipient of our 2025 Senior of the Year Award at a ceremony in May 2025. All candidates and their guests will be invited to attend the ceremony featuring light refreshments, entertainment and announcement of award recipient. At this event, all nominees will be recognized and will receive a certificate signed by the mayor.
Subscribe to this page to get an email when we share more details about the 2025 award ceremony.
2024 Senior of the Year nominees
Congratulations to our 2024 Senior of the Year, Donna Dubie!
In 2024, 17 outstanding older adults were nominated for this award. Open the accordions below to learn about each nominee.
Donna Dubie - 2024 Senior of the Year recipientNominated by Maedith RadleinDonna’s community impact is far-reaching and extends throughout organizations such as the K-W Urban Native Wigwam project, Grand Valley Institution for Women, Unified Family Court, Waterloo-Wellington Reintegration Planning Table, Family & Children’s Services, and the Region of Waterloo Anti-Racism Working Group. Many know Donna as the founder of the Healing of the Seven Generations whose mission it is to help First Peoples heal from the abusive and racist systems of the past and present. Where there is a need for Indigenous knowledge and lived experience, Donna is a sought-after resource to school boards, municipalities, and community agencies. As an inspiring teacher and speaker, and as an insightful and generous participant in regional governance, Donna is an exemplary of loving community. Thank you Donna for creating spaces for Indigenous and non-Indigenous people to grieve, connect and learn together towards shaping a different future for the next seven generations!Donna ArchibaldNominated by Tavenna Kum – Fierce N Fit Special Needs Charitable OrganizationDonna has proven to be a valuable asset to the Fierce N Fit Special Needs Charitable Organization since recently joining as a volunteer coach. With a background as an Educational Assistant, Donna’s expertise and experience have been invaluable in tailoring coaching methods which emphasize teamwork, perseverance, and the importance of embracing diversity to meet the unique needs of each participant on the boxing team. The transition from educational assistant to coach is a testament to Donna’s deep commitment to creating a sense of belonging and accomplishment through physical fitness. Donna’s efforts to promote inclusivity and understanding extend beyond the gym, creating a ripple effect within the community. Thank you Donna for being a source of inspiration to both participants and fellow volunteers through your passion for embracing diversity and inclusion for all!Esseleyne BellNominated by Eunice Ramsay – KW Black Women’s League & Anne WoolnerEsseleyne has owned the Caribbean Kitchen for 17 years and shares her wonderful cooking talents by voluntarily supporting hundreds of people in the community. For example, Esseleyne has been cooking free meals for 60-80 students each week at Wilfrid Laurier University for several years. The meals not only provide a source of fellowship for the students, but also help to extend their budgets. Esseleyne has also volunteered with the KW Black Women’s League for 13 years, and supports the Multicultural Festival, Blues Festival and many other events which bring the community together. She has volunteered at the Soup kitchen, has prepared huge Christmas dinners, and has provided meal delivery to seniors during the pandemic. Thank you Esseleyne for putting so much love into the meals you provide and for sharing your warmth, kindness, and generosity with so many in our community!Liz BurkeNominated by Taveena Kum – Fierce N Fit Special Needs Charitable OrganizationSince joining the Fit N Fierce organization in 2021, Liz has demonstrated an exceptional commitment to supporting individuals with special needs, particularly those affected by cerebral palsy. Liz brings a personal connection that goes beyond mere volunteerism, demonstrating a level of empathy and understanding that has profoundly impacted others. She ensures that each boxing team participant feels empowered, fostering a sense of belonging and confidence through physical fitness. Liz’s accomplishments extend beyond the gym program to both fundraising and advocacy work. Her unwavering dedication to challenging stereotypes, coupled with her inclusive approach, have inspired fellow volunteers and community members alike. Thank you Liz for making a positive impact in the broader community by raising awareness and empowering those living with special needs!Kenneth CampbellNominated by Anne Cameron – Waterloo Region Nordic Sports ClubFor 17 years, Ken has been a member and volunteer of the Waterloo Region Nordic Sports Club, based at Rockway Golf Course. As an instructor, Ken has taught countless youth and adults. He has also coached competitively, including Para Nordic skiers. As the Club’s President, Ken is devoted to growing many initiatives; from: co-writing grants, to purchasing and maintaining equipment, to liaising with the governing body on new policies, to creating a field trip program for grades 4-7, to scouting out snow conditions at other facilities. One of Ken’s most impactful initiatives has been the development of the youth equipment rental program. Ken leads a committee in purchasing equipment and ensures that over 180 youth with skis are personally fitted with skis, boots, and poles, providing affordable access to the sport. Thank you Ken for your vision, leadership, and dedication in growing Nordic skiing in our community!Helen CiprianoNominated by Nancy MohringHelen has been volunteering with Hospice Volunteer Region since 2021. During this time she has contributed over 480 hours delivering treats to residents and assisting with the laundry program. Helen takes great care in each of her interactions and provides a warm and compassionate presence for residents and family members. Helen greets everyone warmly and often has a story to share in between doing laundry or coming around with the treat cart. Residents look forward to Helen’s visits as she shares smiles and a warm heart when needed most. She also visits people in hospital while they are waiting for long term care or hospice services. In addition, Helen supports her church by assisting with banking. Thank you Helen for sharing your time, warmth, and compassion to bring comfort to others during their most vulnerable times!Charles DebrotNominated by Ashlynne Bowen – Community Support ConnectionsCharles has been a valued volunteer driver with Meals on Wheels since 2018. Last year alone, Charles donated over 260 hours of his time, completing 130 routes, while driving over 2,000 kilometers to deliver approximately 1,300 meals to some of our most vulnerable community members. As a regular donor, Charles also gives back his mileage reimbursement each month. His kindness and thoughtfulness set him apart in the organization. Charles gets to know clients and has personal conversations with each of them during deliveries. He is extremely reliable, and even helps to secure coverage for shifts if planning to be away. Charles is also one of the Meals on Wheels training mentors. Last year he trained 5 new volunteers by taking them out on a route, reviewing procedures, and providing guidance for scenarios which may arise. Thank you Charles for being a highly dedicated and valued champion of the Meals on Wheels program!Ron DowhaniukNominated by Dawn Gill – Kitchener Centre MP Mike MorriceRon has volunteered with the King Edward School’s lunch program for 20 years. Additionally he is an active participant and current Board President for the Cambridge Rowing Club. Since 2023, Ron has also served as a weekly Reception and Administrative volunteer for the office of MP Mike Morrice. As a former Executive Director of the United Way Cambridge and North Dumfires, Ron is attuned to many of the complex needs and challenges community members encounter and is diligent in ensuring each person is served with care and kindness in a timely manner. From answering the phone, to preparing intake documents, to comforting people who are experiencing challenges, Ron’s gifts of time and knowledge are invaluable resources. Thank you Ron for providing friendly, knowledgeable, and caring assistance to those seeking support with federal services!Louise GardinerNominated by Michelle BurkeLouise is dedicated to her family and leads by example. Her volunteer contributions in the community and extensive. Some of the roles she has served in include: 30-year member and twice-serving President of the Rotary Club of Kitchener; mentor with the Women in Communications & Technology program, Waterloo Region steering committee member for International Women’s Day; and Grand River Hospital Foundation member. Additionally, Louise has served as a fundraiser and advocate for organizations such as: A Better Tent City, Ray of Hope, Kidsability and Nutrition for Learning. Louise’s community connections enable her to rally support and inspire others to engage in advancing the mission of the countless organizations she supports. Louise has done all this while raising a family and tackling a successful career in the travel industry. Thank you Louise for your tireless energy and far-reaching commitment to improving the lives of others in our community!Patricia GrundyNominated by Fiona Cross – Stanley Park Community AssociationPatricia has been a member of St. Anthony Daniel parish since 1974. She has served in many areas of ministry, most notably as Chair of the Rite of Adult Catholic Initiations for 40 years. Additionally, Patricia has been a long-time activist for environmental sustainability, dedicated to education and implementing systems to reduce waste. In 2022, Patricia initiated the Recycling Beyond the Blue Box program at the Stanley Park Community Centre. Patricia coordinates a volunteer team that sorts and transports recyclable materials to companies that transform them into usable items. Patricia has led workshops on the program at local churches, schools, and community events. Patricia has connected her passion for sustainability with charitable fundraisers so that recycled items also contribute to causes such as TABS 4 Wheels and Canadian Food for Children. Thank you Patricia t for demonstrating a profound commitment to the environment and for inspiring others to walk in your footsteps!Dorina IdvorianNominated by Paulina Popescu – ARTA Romanian AssociationDorina is known as an incredibly loyal and hardworking volunteer in the Romanian-Canadian Community. As a former 20-year instructor and coordinator of the Floral Design Certificate program at Conestoga College, Dorina lends her talents to organizations such as the St. Mary’s Hospital Foundations’ Festival of Trees, as well as several activities hosted by the ARTA Romanian Association, where she has been a long-serving member. Dorina provides traditional costumes and decorations for events, leads floral demonstrations for children and seniors, writes articles for the Romanian Newspaper, and sponsored the Muzidava musical group. Dorina also provides friendly visits to seniors living in isolation and provides them with rides to activities and event. Thank you Dorina for your endless energy, enthusiasm, and commitment to keeping up the traditions of the Romanian-Canadian community!Marcela KüpferNominated by Josi Pape – COMPASS Refugee CentreMarcela has volunteered as a language interpreter and translator with COMPASS Refugee Centre for over 2 years. By helping clients overcome language barriers as they work with caseworkers, Marcela helps to ensure both parties can be confident that their written and verbal communication are clear, thus enabling clients to make informed decisions for themselves and proceed to hearings with courage. Marcela embraces her role with compassion, understating and integrity. She is flexible with her time, often making herself available on short notice to help clients facing tight deadlines. Marcela also finds time to volunteer with Mission Thrift on Kent, most recently as a board member. Thank you Marcela for sharing your time, compassion, and expertise in supporting refugee claimants and protected persons as they seek safety and security for their families!Christine McLauchlinNominated by Willowside Housing Co-operativeChristine has been a member at Willowside Housing Cooperative since moving from Windsor in 2013. Instantly she started volunteering, serving on the board of directors for Willowside, as well as the Central Ontario Housing Federation, and the Co-operative Housing Federation. By expanding her knowledge through these roles, Christine brought new initiatives back to her own community. Willowside members frequently comment on Christine’s kindness, work ethic and community pride. She continually initiates projects which benefit others, such as organizing community events, cleaning and beautifying common areas, gardening, and hosting crafting activities for the children. Christine leads by example, inspiring the next generation of co-op members. Despite personal challenges, she continues to prioritize the wellbeing of her community. Thank you Christine for your leadership and dedication towards creating a community that all Willowside members can be proud of!Rukia MohamudNominated by Radwan Sabriye – African Family Revival OrganizationRukia has dedicated her time and efforts to providing emotional support within her senior group and circle of friends. Despite experiencing significant personal adversity, Rukia has emerged as a beacon of resilience, strength, and compassion, serving as a role model and inspiration for others. By offering a listening ear, comforting shoulder and words of encouragement, Rukia has provided solace and strength to those facing their own hardships. Rukia’s ability to turn personal adversity into acts of kindness and compassion have not only uplifted those directly touched by her efforts but has also served as a catalyst for positive change within her community. Her actions serve as a testament to the impact of empathy, selflessness, and compassion in building resilient communities. Thank you Rukia for providing resilience and hope to those navigating hardships by demonstrating extraordinary courage and compassion!Ken SchillingNominated by Tammy CummingAs a 34-year volunteer with the Kitchener Minor Baseball Association, Ken has made a profound impact in the community. His volunteer roles have included President and Vice-President, Director at large on the board, baseball clinic and camp organizer, equipment manager, and coach. Ken has also been instrumental in improving baseball facilities by getting the new batting cages, lighting and benches built at Breithaupt Park. Ken’s collaborative spirit and ability to unite individuals toward a common goal serve as a catalyst for success. His skills in baseball, along with a focus on skill development, community building, and ensuring players have fun, have made him a beloved figure within KMBA. Ken’s positive impact on the youth he coaches is exemplified by the many young players who return to volunteer as adults. Thank you Ken for inspiring the entire baseball community to strive for success both on and off the field by exemplifying the values of leadership, teamwork, and community service!Donna SwiechNominated by Taweena Kum – Fit N Fierce Special Needs Charitable OrganizationDonna has demonstrated exceptional commitment to the Fit N Fierce Special Needs Charitable Organization. In her roles as a volunteer coach, event organizer and as President on the Board of Executives, Donna’s leadership has been instrumental in shaping the organization into a supportive and inclusive community for individuals living with special needs. By drawing upon her abilities to foster community connections and partnerships, Donna plays a pivotal role in coordinating the organizations’ annual fundraising auction, generating approximately $30,000 per year to sustain and expand programs. Donna’s community contributions extend to supporting local homeless shelters as well. She initiated the “Penny’s for Socks” and “Blessing Bags” programs which have helped provide those who are homeless with essentials such as socks and hygiene products. Thank you Donna for your selfless dedication, compassionate spirit, and commitment to bettering the lives of countless individuals in our community!Ann WhittleNominated by City of Kitchener Councillor Member Paul SinghFor over 15 years, Anne has volunteered with the Alpine Neighbourhood Association. Her leadership and advocacy have been a driving force behind numerous neighbourhood improvement projects such as the establishment of a community garden for Alpine residents, and the installation of a new playground in Alpine Park. Ann’s passion for community is demonstrated in her commitment to events such as Earth Day clean ups and Neighbours Day. Ann has also served for 10 years on both the organizing committee, and as an event day volunteer for the Ward 6 Cinema Under the Stars outdoor movie night. As a volunteer at the forefront of these events, Ann helps to foster a sense of belonging by bringing residents together in meaningful ways. Thank you Ann for improving the quality of life for Alpine Neighbourhood residents through your leadership and commitment to serving others!


Title: View our Dog licensing and registration page
License your dog
Dogs in Kitchener are licensed by theHumane Society of Kitchener Waterloo and Stratford Perth. Licensing fees directly fund the Humane Society, not the City of Kitchener.
Dog owners must license their pet every year. We partner withRen’s Petsto offer a $20 voucher when youpurchase your licenseonline.
Buy online
You can order a dog licence online throughthe Humane Society's website.
Buy in person
You can licence your dog in person at theKitchener Waterloo Animal Centrelocated at250 Riverbend Drivein Kitchener.
2024 licensing fees
Pet overpopulation is a serious issue. Our licensing fees are higher for unsterilized dogs to encourage spaying and neutering. Licensing fees are also lower for dogs owned by seniors.
Spayed or neutered dog
new dog: $37.36before expiry: $37.36puppysix months old and younger: $37.36after expiry: $55.45
Spayed or neutered dog – senior owner
new dog: $31.34before expiry: $31.34puppy six months old and younger: $31.34after expiry: $49.43
Non-spayed or neutered dog
new dog: $73.53before expiry: $73.53puppy six months old and younger: $37.36after expiry: $110.95
Non spayed or neutered dog – senior owner
new dog: $67.51before expiry: $67.51puppy six months old and younger: $31.34after expiry: $104.93
Designated dogs
before expiry: $98.89after expiry: $147.13
All dogs
transfer from another jurisdiction: $9.63replacement tag: $8.45
Why license your dog?
Licensed dogs found by a member of the public and collected by the Humane Society are returned immediately to their owner without a trip to the shelter.
Annual license renewal ensures that the Humane Society has your current contact information and address. Because of this, 100% of licensed dogs are returned to their home when found.
Humane Society services
The Humane Society of Kitchener Waterloo and Stratford Perth is contacted by the City to carry out many animal services.
Report a dead or dangerous animal
The Humane Society runs anafter-hours serviceto report injured, dead or dangerous animals. Visittheir websitefor details or call 519-745-5615.
If you see a dead animal on the road (roadkill), call us at 519-741-2345.
Animal services
The human society performs several services in Kitchener. Visittheir websitefor details or call 519-745-5615.
animal bylaw servicesanimal control servicesstray dogs/dogs at largestray cats (confined)injured domestic animalsinjured wildlifeafter hours emergency serviceanimal sheltering servicesdog licensingdog bite reports
Report animal cruelty
To report cases of animal cruelty, abandonment or neglect, please call the Province of Ontario’s 24/7 Hotline at 1-833-9ANIMAL (1-833-926-4625). In an emergency, you can also contact the police.


Title: Development and construction
Quick Links
Official PlanObjectives and policies to help coordinate our future planning and development.
ZoningZoning information, including our zoning bylaw and review.
Site plansYou may need to submit a site plan application, depending on your project.
Community plansOur community plans help guide the development of large areas.
Building permitsEverything you need to know about getting a building permit in Kitchener.
EngineeringEngineering permits and information to help with your project.
Current planning applicationsMap with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
ConstructionNew and restorative structure and infrastructure construction work information.
Heritage permits and guidelinesApply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Urban designArchitecture, landscape and planning practices used to design Kitchener spaces.
Fire safetyFire safety resources for your development.
Understanding city planningLearn about land use planning in Kitchener.
Resources for builders and developersList of resources and information on City of Kitchener development requirements.
Official Plan
Objectives and policies to help coordinate our future planning and development.
Zoning
Zoning information, including our zoning bylaw and review.
Site plans
You may need to submit a site plan application, depending on your project.
Community plans
Our community plans help guide the development of large areas.
Building permits
Everything you need to know about getting a building permit in Kitchener.
Engineering
Engineering permits and information to help with your project.
Current planning applications
Map with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Construction
New and restorative structure and infrastructure construction work information.
Heritage permits and guidelines
Apply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Urban design
Architecture, landscape and planning practices used to design Kitchener spaces.
Fire safety
Fire safety resources for your development.
Understanding city planning
Learn about land use planning in Kitchener.
Resources for builders and developers
List of resources and information on City of Kitchener development requirements.


Title: View our Encampments page
Homelessness
The number of people experiencing homelessness in Waterloo Region has grown significantly over the past few years. The Region of Waterloo estimates that around1,000 people are currently experiencing homelessnessacross the region, including hundreds of people experiencing chronic homelessness.
Homelessness is a complex issue that is impacted by many factors, including housing affordability, support services infrastructure, mental health and trauma, job loss, poverty, synthetic drugs and the opioid crisis.
Responsibility
The Region of Waterloo is the lead forhousing and shelterlocally. As a result of increasing community need, the Region is working with municipal and community partners to findinterim housing solutions. These solutions include new emergency shelter spaces and a managed outdoor shelter. Read more about theRegion’s plan for the first outdoor shelter, set to open in 2023.
We continue to work with the Region and local partners to address the complex issue of homelessness and encampments. Find out more about how we’resupporting affordable housing in Kitchener.
Addressing homelessness requires an all-of-community approach that includes community members, businesses, social support groups, local municipalities, the Region of Waterloo and provincial and federal partners. We’re committed to doing our part to find and implement solutions.
Victoria Park
Increased homelessness has led to highly visible encampments in public places, including Victoria Park, a City-owned property. We are working with the Region, community partners and service providers to address the challenges of this encampment.
Although those camping in Victoria Park are violating some bylaws, we have been taking a compassionate approach to addressing this encampment. However, we know that unmanaged encampments are not a safe long-term solution to the housing crisis, and we will continue to play our part in finding and implementing solutions.
As the Region of Waterloo makes additional shelter options available, we will support the residents of Roos Island in their relocation. Service providers for the Region’s new managed outdoor shelter have begun engaging encampment residents to determine their interest in this new housing option.
Our goal is to ensure Victoria Park is returned to its intended use as a public park, available for all residents to enjoy as soon as possible, while supporting those living on Roos Island to relocate to a safer and more appropriate shelter. Supported relocation involves:
engaging residents and identifying alternative places to liveaddressing their basic needs for housingimproving upon their current housingconnecting residents with the necessary social and health support services
By-law and other City staff visit Roos Island daily to check on residents, help connect them with shelter options and other services, check for fire risks and provide safer heating options. Staff also facilitate daily garbage removal and cleanup of litter, sharps and abandoned or damaged tents. Staff and contracted security regularly patrol Victoria Park to address any safety or security issues raised by park users or Roos Island residents.
Note: Beginning April 26, 2023, access to Roos Island in Victoria Park will be limited to existing campers, service providers, individuals who are supporting campers and city staff. All campers on Roos Island have been offered one or more interim housing options. Most have voluntarily accepted an offer and will be moving in the coming days.Read more here.
Questions or concerns
If you have encampment-related concerns, please:
call the Region of Waterloo at 519-575-4400: homelessness and housing questionscall the City of Kitchener at 519-741-2345 orreport a problem online: garbage, nuisance concerns, unsafe conditionscall Waterloo Regional Police Service at 519-570-9777 orreport online: non-emergency criminal activity (example: theft)call 911: emergencies only
If you are looking for an emergency shelter, you can find shelter details and contact information on theRegion of Waterloo emergency shelter page.


Title: View our Brownfield incentive program page
About the program
We’ve partnered with the Region of Waterloo to offerfinancial incentivesincluding:
reduction in regional development chargesa joint tax increment grant program
Thisprogramallows us to:
offer tax assistance to developers and property owners to help with the clean-up of eligible brownfield propertiesguide and help you with the planning approvals processhelp you to recover your remediation costs which improves your return on investment
Redevelopment examples
Some of the successful redevelopments that have come about because of our support for brownfield remediation include:
Kaufman Lofts, a factory-to-loft conversionThe InTowns - Highland & Queen, a former industrial site now fully developed with town homesThe Tannery District, now home to the Communitech Hub, Velocity and Desire2LearnBreithaupt Block, a factory to office conversion and home of Google
Benefits
By transforming existing buildings, we’re able to:
support our environmental goalssupport our growth management strategyuse existing infrastructureneighbourhood revitalization
We’re also strengthening our local economy by converting vacant, non-tax-paying assets into productive redevelopments.


Title: View our City archives page
Our collections
Within our collection, you'll find records and historic information on:
Village, Town and City of BerlinCity of KitchenerVillage of BridgeportTownship of Waterloo
City documents include:
assessment rolls from 1854 to presentboard of health recordsboard of park management recordsbylaws from 1864 to presentcouncil minutes 1854 to presentKitchener City Hall records (1924 - 1997)organizational chartsrecreation commission records (1948 - 1965)water commission recordsparks and recreation commission records (1963 - 1973)millennium project recordsformer visitor convention bureau
Photos and maps include:
aerial photos from 1946 to 1984maps from 1857 to presentphotographs of places, people, and events from 1924 onwardMoe Norman collectionHarry Class collection
Recreation records include:
Kitchener Memorial Auditorium board of management recordsKitchener Minor Soccer Association records
See the collectionsavailable online.
Access conditions
We reserve the right to:
refuse disclosure of some records under the guidelines set byMunicipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act (MFIPPA)refuse access to archival items too fragile or valuable to handlewhere practical and appropriate, reproductions will be made and substituted for the original for public display or research purposesrestrict the amount of material a researcher may use at one timeprohibit access to archival items to those individuals who violate the corporate archives' care and handling rules
For more information, please contact ourrecords and archives specialist, at 519-741-2200, ext. 7769.
Donations
We are always looking to grow our collection of archives and we welcome donations that meet our mandate and are deemed to be of archival value. Donations we accept may include records and artifacts that pay homage to the people, groups, and events that have helped shape Kitchener.
Donations to our archives are accepted on a permanent basis and are subject to our donation agreement, which outlines all applicable conditions and/or restrictions. We legally own all materials in our corporate archives.
We will accept donations of personal papers and other items if they complement our existing corporate archival holdings or serve to fill a gap in our collection.
We may not accept:
oversized/large items due to space availabilitymaterials in extremely poor physical condition due to the lack of resources to restore them
We will not accept:
items that we cannot preserve under proper storage conditionscontaminated items that could pose risk to staff, researchers and other archival materials
For more information, please contact our records and archives specialist, at 519-741-2200 ext: 7769.
Reproductions
You can request reproductions, such as photocopies, reprints of photographs and digitized images, provided:
The reproduction will not likely damage the records. The city reserves the right to refuse the reproduction of any records which might be damaged during the handling and/or reproduction process.Permission is granted for the reproduction of a single copy only, and for one-time use. No copies are to be sold, further reproduced, or published without prior consent of the city. Exceptions to these conditions detailing the agreed upon use of the reproduction and any restrictions must be approved first by the manager of corporate records and archives services.The requester assumes all responsibility for obtaining copyright clearance and reproduction rights and for any infringement of existing copyright legislation.Credit for the reproduced item is given to the City of Kitchener corporate archives.
Cost of reproductions
Fees vary depending on the size of the original and the physical reproduction, as well as other factors like the availability of photo negatives. We charge these fees to recover our service costs. Any applicable delivery, shipping and handling costs will also be charged. Where possible, digital reproductions will be provided at no cost.
Wherever possible, we will provide a reasonable estimate of the costs associated with reproductions if more than $25. We cannot guarantee the estimate as the final amount.


Title: View our Open data licence page
Open data licence
The information provider grants a worldwide, royalty-free, perpetual, non-exclusive license to use the data covered by our license. This includes for commercial purposes.
Using information covered by the licence means you accept the following terms.
Allowed uses
Our data can be used in any medium, mode or format for any lawful purpose. This includes:
copyingmodifyingpublishingtranslatingadaptingdistributing
This list is not exclusive, and you are not required to credit the City of Kitchener. If you choose to voluntarily credit us, please use this text:
Contains information licensed under the Open Government Licence - The Corporation of the City of Kitchener
Exemptions
This licence does not grant you right to use:
personal informationinformation or records not accessible under the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Actthird-party rights the information provider is not authorized to licensethe names, crests, logos, or other official symbols of the information providerinformation subject to other intellectual property rights, including patents, trademarks and official marks.
Non-endorsement
This licence does not grant you any right to use the information in a way that suggests any official status or that the information provider endorses you or your use of the information.
No warranty
The information is licensed "as is," and the information provider excludes all representations, warranties, obligations, and liabilities, whether express or implied, to the maximum extent permitted by law.
The information provider is not liable for any errors or omissions in the Information, and will not under any circumstances be liable for any direct, indirect, special, incidental, consequential, or other loss, injury or damage caused by its use or otherwise arising in connection with this licence or the Information, even if specifically advised of the possibility of such loss, injury or damage.
Governing law
This licence is governed by the laws of the Province of Ontario and the applicable laws of Canada.
Legal proceedings related to this licence may only be brought in the courts of Ontario.
Definitions
In this licence, the terms below have the following meanings:
"Information" means information resources or records protected by copyright or other information or records that are offered for use under the terms of this licence."Information provider" means the Corporation of The City of Kitchener"Personal information" has the meaning set out in section 2 of the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act"Records" has the meaning of "record" as set out in the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act"You" means the natural or legal person, or body of persons corporate or incorporate, acquiring rights under this licence
Versioning
This is version 1.0 of the Open Government Licence - The Corporation of the City of Kitchener. The information provider may make changes to the terms of this licence from time to time and issue a new version of the licence. Your use of the Information will be governed by the terms of the licence in force as of the date you accessed the information.


Title: View our Keep your home safe page
Quick Links
Backyard pool safetyPool safety rules, fence bylaws and proper draining of pools and hot tubs.
Cooking fire safetyCooking is the number one cause of residential fires in Ontario.
Direct DetectA monitoring tool to automatically contact Kitchener Fire if an alarm goes off.
Escape plansMake and practice fire escape plans for every floor of your house.
Fire and carbon monoxide alarmsInformation on how to properly install and service home alarms.
Natural gas emergencyNatural gas leaks are rare, but it's important to know what to look for.
Watermain break repairsWhat to look for, do and expect when a watermain breaks.
Backyard pool safety
Pool safety rules, fence bylaws and proper draining of pools and hot tubs.
Cooking fire safety
Cooking is the number one cause of residential fires in Ontario.
Direct Detect
A monitoring tool to automatically contact Kitchener Fire if an alarm goes off.
Escape plans
Make and practice fire escape plans for every floor of your house.
Fire and carbon monoxide alarms
Information on how to properly install and service home alarms.
Natural gas emergency
Natural gas leaks are rare, but it's important to know what to look for.
Watermain break repairs
What to look for, do and expect when a watermain breaks.


Title: 
About Neighbours Day
Neighbours Day is a city-wide porch party! Local musicians will lend their unique talents by staging pop-up concerts in neighbourhoods all over Kitchener.
From porches to driveways, front lawns to boulevards, you’re invited to join in the fun by bringing your lawn chair to enjoy some live entertainment in celebration of Neighbours Day.
This is a free event, and no registration is required.
Date and time
date: Saturday, June 15, 2024time: concerts at 1 p.m., 2 p.m., 4 p.m. and 5 p.m.
Performers and locations
Check out ourinteractive mapto find performers and locations, or reference the table below.
StreetMusician or bandTimeWardActiva AvenueCraig McNair5 p.m.FiveAlbion StreetJP Sunga5 p.m.SixAlice AvenueSivle2 p.m.EightAppalachian CrescentGalt Idea Exchange Ukulele Club2 p.m.SixBaird AvenueSing Me a River1 p.m.OneBanffshire CrescentJessie T1 p.m.FiveBlair Creek DriveTHE FATHER & SON DUO5 p.m.FourBlucher StreetSandy MacDonald1 p.m.TenBlue Spruce CourtTravis Brooks5 p.m.SevenBorden Avenue NorthBrent Hagerman and the Passive Resistors2 p.m.TenBroadview AvenueDKHB Duo1 p.m.TwoCarina StreetYvonne & The Riffs2 p.m.FiveChapel Hill DriveVox Confidential1 p.m.FourCharleston PlaceMichael Kelly Cavan5 p.m.TwoCharnwood CourtAmanda Kind & James Downham4 p.m.SevenClive RoadRussell Allen Scott4 p.m.TenColebrook CourtVox Confidential4 p.m.SixCommonwealth CrescentJessie T4 p.m.FiveCountrystone DriveAnna Peveroni5 p.m.SixCovington CrescentSuburban Bicycle Gang1 p.m.SevenCumberland PlaceMr. J and the Groovy Gang1 p.m.SevenDalegrove DriveBig Shaney Tunes4 p.m.EightDane StreetTZR: Loop Artist1 p.m.TenDane StreetKW Collective Band2 p.m.TenDavid Bergey DriveAngelica Appelman4 p.m.FiveDavid StreetBoys & I1 p.m.NineDonald StreetSing Me a River4 p.m.OneDuchess AvenueSonic Uke Ensemble2 p.m.EightEast AvenueLuke Michielsen5 p.m.TenEthel StreetKW Collective Band5 p.m.OneEton DriveThe Guistini Sisters1 p.m.OneFarrier DriveSandy MacDonald4 p.m.FourFischer-Hallman RoadElg Lamont Nixon Trio5 p.m.FiveForfar CourtPAULiNE1 p.m.OneForfar CourtSammy Duke2 p.m.OneFranklin Street NorthEric Jackson & The Willow River Band2 p.m.TwoFranklin Street NorthMr. J and the Groovy Gang4 p.m.TwoGarden AvenueRowdy Ray & The Vagabond2 p.m.NineGlasgow StreetSivle5 p.m.EightGlen Avon CrescentJoshua Pascua1 p.m.SevenGlen Avon CrescentFionn Isle2 p.m.SevenGlen Lake CrescentSuburban Bicycle Gang4 p.m.SevenGolden Meadow CrescentFionn Isle5 p.m.SevenGoundry CrescentFriday Empire2 p.m.SixGruhn StreetRowdy Ray & The Vagabond5 p.m.NineHazelglen DriveBrent Hagerman and the Passive Resistors5 p.m.EightHenhoeffer CrescentCraig McNair2 p.m.FiveHett AvenueLuke Allan1 p.m.TenHighland Road EastPAULiNE4 p.m.NineHistand TrailAngelica Appelman1 p.m.FiveInge CourtCassTheHuman4 p.m.OneKingsway DriveElle Shea1 p.m.ThreeKraft AvenueClarissa Diokno5 p.m.TwoMarketa CrescentRick Andrade4 p.m.OneMeadow CrescentBen Rollo1 p.m.EightMeadowlane DriveJP Sunga2 p.m.SevenMichener CrescentEric Jackson & The Willow River Band4 p.m.TwoNathalie CourtFriday Empire5 p.m.FiveNewcastle DriveTZR: Loop Artist5 p.m.FiveOld Chicopee DriveAmanda Braam4 p.m.TwoOld Huron RoadBoys & I4 p.m.FourOlympic DriveAnat4 p.m.NineOswego CourtSammy Duke5 p.m.OneOverlea DriveTravis Brooks2 p.m.EightPandora Avenue NorthKROKA5 p.m.TenPark StreetKROKA2 p.m.NinePaulander DriveAnat1 p.m.EightPaulander DriveJaspreet Sanghera4 p.m.EightPepperwood CrescentDan Walsh1 p.m.TwoPerkell PlaceThe Guistini Sisters4 p.m.OneRed Maple PlaceNick Bordman4 p.m.SevenRipplewood CrescentNick Bordman1 p.m.EightRobert Ferrie DriveJaspreet Sanghera1 p.m.FourRockcliffe DriveTHE FATHER & SON DUO2 p.m.FiveRoseneath CrescentYvonne & The Riffs5 p.m.SixSamuel StreetLuke Michielsen2 p.m.TenSchweitzer StreetCassTheHuman1 p.m.OneSimeon StreetLuke Allan3 p.m.TenSimeon StreetAlan Charlebois5 p.m.TenSims Estate DriveElle Shea4 p.m.TwoSpringmount DriveMichael Kelly Cavan2 p.m.TwoSt Vincent StreetRussell Allen Scott1 p.m.TenSusan CourtMarc & Murray4 p.m.TwoTheresa StreetAlan Charlebois2 p.m.NineTinatawa CourtElg Lamont Nixon Trio2 p.m.TwoTyson Drive (Tyson Park)Galt Idea Exchange Ukulele Club5 p.m.OneValebrook CourtClarissa Diokno2 p.m.TwoVintage CrescentDadBand2 p.m.FourVintage CrescentDadBand5 p.m.FourVista CrescentSonic Uke Ensemble5 p.m.EightWaterford CourtAmanda Kind & James Downham1 p.m.FourWaterford CourtJoshua Pascua4 p.m.FourWellington Street NorthAnna Peveroni2 p.m.TenWestwood DriveBen Rollo4 p.m.EightWilderness DriveRick Andrade1 p.m.FiveWoodland AvenueBig Shaney Tunes1 p.m.NineWoodmans CourtDKHB Duo4 p.m.FourZellers DriveMarc & Murray1 p.m.Two
Neighbours Day 2025
Subscribe to this page to get an email when these applications open for Neighbours Day 2025:
become a musicianbecome a music ambassadorget on the map
Photo gallery
Check out some photos of past Neighbours Day events below.
Photo Gallery: Neighbours Day will appear here on the public site.


Title: Rockway Golf Course
Contact information
Address:625 Rockway Drive, Kitchener, Ontario
Phone number: 519-741-2949
Championship 18-hole course
This 18-hole, par 70 course was designed by Stanley Thompson. Built in 1935, Rockway remains one of the finest public golf courses in Ontario.
Course details5,520 yard course.Par 70 for men, par 71 for women.Course rating/slope for men112/66.565.0/109Course rating/slope for women70.3/10969.1/10768.0/106
Clubhouse
Visit theclubhouseto find:
the Snack Shackour pro shopchangerooms
Rentals
You can rent rooms at Rockway Golf Course for meetings or events. Tables and chairs are included in the room rental rate.Meeting Room – seating capacity 20 people – $123 half day or $202 full day, including HSTBanquet Room – seating capacity 120 people – $615 half day or $935 full day, including HSTDepending on the nature of your event other rental costs can include:Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensingIf you're interested in booking this facility or getting a more detailed quote, pleasecomplete the inquiry formto tell us more about your event. Staff will confirm the details of your event with you before finalizing the booking.
Guidelines
Please follow these guidelines and rules when you're coming to a Kitchener Golf course:A valid credit card is required when making a booking. When a player fails to show up for a tee time, this negatively impacts the operation of the clubs and the experience of other players. A no show fee will be charged in the event that a player does not show up and does not contact the club to cancel at least 4 hours before a confirmed tee time (a “no show”). A no show fee in an amount equivalent to the green fee that would have applied to the round will be charged to either the no show player’s credit card or to the credit card on file for the player who booked the tee time for the no show player.Arrive to the course no later than 20 minutes before your tee-time.Pace of play is important to everyone. Be respectful of the other golfers and manage your pace of play appropriately.Replace your divots, rake the bunkers behind you and repair ball marks on the greens with either a ball mark tool or a tee.Every player must have their own bag and clubs. Rental clubs are available through the pro shop.Course closes at dark, please ensure all rental carts are returned before dark.Dress code: golfers must be properly attired at all times on premises, including the clubhouse.Men must wear shirts with sleeves.Ladies must wear clothing that covers their midriff.Cut-off shorts or jeans with holes are not permitted.Only Golf shoes or any other flat athletic shoes are permitted. Metal spikes or sport cleats are prohibited.To serve our customers better we ask that you provide both a phone number and email address on or prior to checking in for your round.No outside alcohol is permitted on the golf course property. We reserve the right to inspect all coolers and golf bags. Possession of alcohol, other than that purchased from this establishment, is against the law. You will be asked to surrender any unauthorized alcohol or to leave the premises.Single riders must pair up. Maximum two carts per group.To save time, you can check-in or pay for your round through our Kitchener Golf app.Each player will abide by and comply with the facility rules and guidelines (posted on scorecard and/or facility signs), as established and updated by the City from time to time, including but not limited to any rules and guidelines relating to public health.


Title: View our Building permits page
Quick Links
Apply for a building permitApplication process for residential and ICI building permits.
Residential building permitsGet a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
ICI building permitsIndustrial, commercial and institutional building permit information.
Miscellaneous permits and applicationsLearn about our building permits and what you need to include in your application.
Building applications and standard formsApplication, standard and inspection forms you may need to get a building permit.
Building permit feesPermit fees, payment information and more information.
Standard details and guidesList of links to help you obtain your building permit as quickly as possible.
Active permits and interactive mappingThe latest mapping and information on your active building permits online.
Building and industry updatesUpdates to the building industry and copies of our annual workshops.
Building requestsFile a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.
Online services portalCheck the status of your building permit and schedule inspections.
Apply for a building permit
Application process for residential and ICI building permits.
Residential building permits
Get a permit for home renovations, additions or construction projects.
ICI building permits
Industrial, commercial and institutional building permit information.
Miscellaneous permits and applications
Learn about our building permits and what you need to include in your application.
Building applications and standard forms
Application, standard and inspection forms you may need to get a building permit.
Building permit fees
Permit fees, payment information and more information.
Standard details and guides
List of links to help you obtain your building permit as quickly as possible.
Active permits and interactive mapping
The latest mapping and information on your active building permits online.
Building and industry updates
Updates to the building industry and copies of our annual workshops.
Building requests
File a complaint about a building or submit an FOI request for a plan or survey.
Online services portal
Check the status of your building permit and schedule inspections.


Title: Zoning
Quick Links
Zoning bylawBylaw information about land, types of buildings, parking and street setbacks.
Zoning bylaw amendmentTo change the permitted use of a property, you must apply for a zoning bylaw amendment.
Zoning (occupancy) certificateA zoning (occupancy) certificate confirms that a change of use to a commercial building is allowed under our zoning bylaw.
Letter of zoning complianceIf you’re buying, selling or mortgaging a property, you may need a letter of zoning compliance.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.
Zoning bylaw
Bylaw information about land, types of buildings, parking and street setbacks.
Zoning bylaw amendment
To change the permitted use of a property, you must apply for a zoning bylaw amendment.
Zoning (occupancy) certificate
A zoning (occupancy) certificate confirms that a change of use to a commercial building is allowed under our zoning bylaw.
Letter of zoning compliance
If you’re buying, selling or mortgaging a property, you may need a letter of zoning compliance.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)
Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.


Title: View our Mill Courtland Woodside Park/Rockway page
About the review
The Mill Courtland Woodside Park/Rockway neighbourhood planning review includes:
the existing Mill Courtland Woodside Park secondary plan areaan existing adjacent area in the 2014 Official Plan
The new area is proposed to become the new Rockway Secondary Plan and the rest of the Mill Courtland Woodside Park secondary plan becomes part of the city’s Official Plan.
We shared the following changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
Existing Land Use MapExisting Zoning MapExisting Zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)
Proposed secondary plan policies and land use
Proposed Secondary Plan PoliciesProposed Applicable Official Plan PoliciesProposed Land Use(Map 15 - within Rockway Secondary Plan)Proposed Land Use(Map 3 - no longer within Rockway Secondary Plan)Land Use TypologiesProposed Revised Urban Structure(Map 2)Proposed Revised Cultural Heritage Resources(Map 9a)Proposed Integrated Transportation System(Map 11)
Proposed zoning
Proposed Zoning Map(within Rockway Secondary Plan)Proposed Zoning Map(no longer within Rockway Secondary Plan)Zoning TypologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and StackingMap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions(specific to properties within Neighbourhood Planning Reviews)
Urban design guidelines
City of Kitchener Urban Design Manual - Residential Infill in Central Neighbourhoods
Previous community engagement
We held an open house to get feedback from the community on March 28, 2019. Use the links below to find information we presented at the open house:
notice of open housestaff presentationinformation panelshandout


Title: View our Civic Centre page
About the review
The Civic Centre neighbourhood planning review includes:
the existing Civic Centre Secondary Plan areapart of the Central Frederick Street Secondary Plan area (around Lancaster Street West)
This new area is proposed to become the new Civic Centre Secondary Plan.
We shared the following changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information
Appendix Document
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
Existing Land Use MapExisting Zoning MapExisting Zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)
Proposed secondary plan policies and land use
Proposed Secondary Plan PoliciesProposed Applicable Official Plan PoliciesProposed Land Use(Map 17)Land Use TypologiesProposed Revised Urban Structure(Map 2)Proposed Revised Cultural Heritage Resources(Map 9a)Proposed Integrated Transportation System(Map 11)
Proposed zoning
Proposed Zoning(Map)Zoning TypologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and StackingMap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions(specific to properties within Neighbourhood Planning Reviews)
Urban design guidelines
City of Kitchener Urban Design Manual - Residential Infill in Central Neighbourhoods


Title: View our Backyard chickens page
Apply for a permit
Before you keep chickens in your backyard, you must:
apply for a permitpay a $54.08 registration feehave your property inspected by staff
The property inspection is to check the distance of your chicken coop from the property line and to ensure other regulations are met.
Chicken coop regulations
Chicken coops must be:
2.5m away from side yard lot lines1.2m away from rear lot lines
If there is not enough room for the distances listed above, you must getconsent from your neighbours.
Use the accordions below to find further regulations on backyard chicken coops.
Backyard chicken regulationsMaximum of 4 chickensNo RoostersSales of eggs, manure and other products associated with the keeping of chickens are not allowedHome slaughter of chickens is not allowedAn application must be submitted to the City prior to obtaining chickens a one-time fee of $54.08 to cover the cost of processing the application and the Officer’s time inspecting the property to ensure complianceInspection of the property must occur prior to approval for chickens to ensure setbacks and proper construction of coopChickens must be kept in an enclosed run when not in their coopChickens must be contained on owners property at all timesChickens must be banded with owner contact informationOwner of chickens must reside on the property where they are keptRental properties – written permission from the owner must be obtainedAll other by-laws will still apply, for example, noise, animal regulations, lot maintenance, property standards.Setback regulations1.2m from rear lot line2.5m from a side lot line2.5m from a rear lot line abutting a side yardChicken coops are not permitted in a front yardExisting sheds/garages can be used for the hen house, only the portion actually used to house hens shall be required to meet the setback requirements.Runs and exterior portions of the coop must meet the setback regulationsMulti-residential properties such as apartments are not permitted to have chickensIf the 2.5m setback cannot be achieved, written permission shall be supplied to By-law Enforcement by all owners and all adult occupants of the adjoining property, the placement of the coop will be permitted based on written consent.An owner or adult occupant of an adjoining property may withdraw consent to the placement of a hen coop or run that is closer to their property than the required 2.5m setback, if they notify the City in writing.  The owner will have to remove or relocate the coop within a permitted area by the later of November 1 of that calendar year or six (6) months following the date of notification being given.Coop regulations and sanitationStructureCoop must provide protection from weather and be adequately ventilatedThe enclosed coop and run shall be constructed and maintained in a manner to exclude rodents and predators from entryWhen chicken wire is used as part of or all of the run enclosure, the openings of the chicken wire shall not be larger than a half inchThe chicken wire should also be buried into the ground surrounding the coop/run at a minimum of 6 inches to help prevent rodents from burrowing into the run areaInteriorThe floor must be constructed of a material that is resistant to moisture, mould, retain heat in the cold weather and exclude rodents and predatorsThe floors must be lined with shavings, straw or other appropriate materials to absorb manure and facilitate cleaningChicken boxes and a perch must be provided to accommodate all hensDust bath area must be provided (helps control mites)CleaningThe coop must be maintained in a clean condition and shall be kept free of odoursThe coop must be deep cleaned 2- 3 times a year which includes disinfecting of troughs, perches and nestsManure must be cleaned out daily and stored in a secured container or composter in accordance with compost regulationsFood and waterFeeders and water containers must be provided, cleaned regularly and disinfectedFeed must be stored in rodent proof containers and secured at all times to prevent rodents and other animals from accessing itDeceased chickensDeceased chickens must be disposed of at a livestock disposal facility or through the services of a veterinarian, or through a facility as approved by the Ministry of Agriculture Food and Rural Affairs
Avian Influenza (bird flu)
Avian Influenza, commonly known as the bird flu, is a viral infection that spreads easily and quickly among birds. This virus can affect several species of food-producing birds (chickens, turkeys, quails, guinea fowl, etc.), as well as pet and wild birds.Signs and symptomsInfected birds may show one or more of the following signs:lack of energy, movement or appetitedecreased egg productionswelling around the head, neck and eyescoughing, gasping for air or sneezingnervous signs, tremors or lack of coordinationdiarrheasudden deathIn rare cases, humans can become infected. Find more information about risks to humans onHealth Canada's website.Keep your birds safe
Follow these tips to protect your backyard chickens from the bird flu:
prevent contact with wild birds and other animalsfrequently clean poultry coops, waterers, feeders, your clothing and your bootsspot the signs of Avian Influenza and report early to a veterinarian or theCanadian Food Inspection Agency(CFIA)limit exposure to visitorsseparate birds, their water and food from wild birds
Learn more on the CFIA's website
Signs and symptoms
Infected birds may show one or more of the following signs:lack of energy, movement or appetitedecreased egg productionswelling around the head, neck and eyescoughing, gasping for air or sneezingnervous signs, tremors or lack of coordinationdiarrheasudden deathIn rare cases, humans can become infected. Find more information about risks to humans onHealth Canada's website.
Keep your birds safe
Neighbour consent
If your property does not have enough room for a 2.5 metre distance from your property line, you need to ask your neighbours to consent to the chicken coop.
Print off our neighbour consent form and get the signatures of your immediate neighbours (with whom you share a property line). Return the form to bylaw enforcement staffby email.
Download the neighbour consent form
Animal bylaw
Review ourfull animal bylawto learn more about backyard chickens.


Title: Click here to view Featured Event
About Neighbours Day
Neighbours Day is a city-wide porch party! Local musicians will lend their unique talents by staging pop-up concerts in neighbourhoods all over Kitchener.
From porches to driveways, front lawns to boulevards, you’re invited to join in the fun by bringing your lawn chair to enjoy some live entertainment in celebration of Neighbours Day.
This is a free event, and no registration is required.
Date and time
date: Saturday, June 15, 2024time: concerts at 1 p.m., 2 p.m., 4 p.m. and 5 p.m.
Performers and locations
Check out ourinteractive mapto find performers and locations, or reference the table below.
StreetMusician or bandTimeWardActiva AvenueCraig McNair5 p.m.FiveAlbion StreetJP Sunga5 p.m.SixAlice AvenueSivle2 p.m.EightAppalachian CrescentGalt Idea Exchange Ukulele Club2 p.m.SixBaird AvenueSing Me a River1 p.m.OneBanffshire CrescentJessie T1 p.m.FiveBlair Creek DriveTHE FATHER & SON DUO5 p.m.FourBlucher StreetSandy MacDonald1 p.m.TenBlue Spruce CourtTravis Brooks5 p.m.SevenBorden Avenue NorthBrent Hagerman and the Passive Resistors2 p.m.TenBroadview AvenueDKHB Duo1 p.m.TwoCarina StreetYvonne & The Riffs2 p.m.FiveChapel Hill DriveVox Confidential1 p.m.FourCharleston PlaceMichael Kelly Cavan5 p.m.TwoCharnwood CourtAmanda Kind & James Downham4 p.m.SevenClive RoadRussell Allen Scott4 p.m.TenColebrook CourtVox Confidential4 p.m.SixCommonwealth CrescentJessie T4 p.m.FiveCountrystone DriveAnna Peveroni5 p.m.SixCovington CrescentSuburban Bicycle Gang1 p.m.SevenCumberland PlaceMr. J and the Groovy Gang1 p.m.SevenDalegrove DriveBig Shaney Tunes4 p.m.EightDane StreetTZR: Loop Artist1 p.m.TenDane StreetKW Collective Band2 p.m.TenDavid Bergey DriveAngelica Appelman4 p.m.FiveDavid StreetBoys & I1 p.m.NineDonald StreetSing Me a River4 p.m.OneDuchess AvenueSonic Uke Ensemble2 p.m.EightEast AvenueLuke Michielsen5 p.m.TenEthel StreetKW Collective Band5 p.m.OneEton DriveThe Guistini Sisters1 p.m.OneFarrier DriveSandy MacDonald4 p.m.FourFischer-Hallman RoadElg Lamont Nixon Trio5 p.m.FiveForfar CourtPAULiNE1 p.m.OneForfar CourtSammy Duke2 p.m.OneFranklin Street NorthEric Jackson & The Willow River Band2 p.m.TwoFranklin Street NorthMr. J and the Groovy Gang4 p.m.TwoGarden AvenueRowdy Ray & The Vagabond2 p.m.NineGlasgow StreetSivle5 p.m.EightGlen Avon CrescentJoshua Pascua1 p.m.SevenGlen Avon CrescentFionn Isle2 p.m.SevenGlen Lake CrescentSuburban Bicycle Gang4 p.m.SevenGolden Meadow CrescentFionn Isle5 p.m.SevenGoundry CrescentFriday Empire2 p.m.SixGruhn StreetRowdy Ray & The Vagabond5 p.m.NineHazelglen DriveBrent Hagerman and the Passive Resistors5 p.m.EightHenhoeffer CrescentCraig McNair2 p.m.FiveHett AvenueLuke Allan1 p.m.TenHighland Road EastPAULiNE4 p.m.NineHistand TrailAngelica Appelman1 p.m.FiveInge CourtCassTheHuman4 p.m.OneKingsway DriveElle Shea1 p.m.ThreeKraft AvenueClarissa Diokno5 p.m.TwoMarketa CrescentRick Andrade4 p.m.OneMeadow CrescentBen Rollo1 p.m.EightMeadowlane DriveJP Sunga2 p.m.SevenMichener CrescentEric Jackson & The Willow River Band4 p.m.TwoNathalie CourtFriday Empire5 p.m.FiveNewcastle DriveTZR: Loop Artist5 p.m.FiveOld Chicopee DriveAmanda Braam4 p.m.TwoOld Huron RoadBoys & I4 p.m.FourOlympic DriveAnat4 p.m.NineOswego CourtSammy Duke5 p.m.OneOverlea DriveTravis Brooks2 p.m.EightPandora Avenue NorthKROKA5 p.m.TenPark StreetKROKA2 p.m.NinePaulander DriveAnat1 p.m.EightPaulander DriveJaspreet Sanghera4 p.m.EightPepperwood CrescentDan Walsh1 p.m.TwoPerkell PlaceThe Guistini Sisters4 p.m.OneRed Maple PlaceNick Bordman4 p.m.SevenRipplewood CrescentNick Bordman1 p.m.EightRobert Ferrie DriveJaspreet Sanghera1 p.m.FourRockcliffe DriveTHE FATHER & SON DUO2 p.m.FiveRoseneath CrescentYvonne & The Riffs5 p.m.SixSamuel StreetLuke Michielsen2 p.m.TenSchweitzer StreetCassTheHuman1 p.m.OneSimeon StreetLuke Allan3 p.m.TenSimeon StreetAlan Charlebois5 p.m.TenSims Estate DriveElle Shea4 p.m.TwoSpringmount DriveMichael Kelly Cavan2 p.m.TwoSt Vincent StreetRussell Allen Scott1 p.m.TenSusan CourtMarc & Murray4 p.m.TwoTheresa StreetAlan Charlebois2 p.m.NineTinatawa CourtElg Lamont Nixon Trio2 p.m.TwoTyson Drive (Tyson Park)Galt Idea Exchange Ukulele Club5 p.m.OneValebrook CourtClarissa Diokno2 p.m.TwoVintage CrescentDadBand2 p.m.FourVintage CrescentDadBand5 p.m.FourVista CrescentSonic Uke Ensemble5 p.m.EightWaterford CourtAmanda Kind & James Downham1 p.m.FourWaterford CourtJoshua Pascua4 p.m.FourWellington Street NorthAnna Peveroni2 p.m.TenWestwood DriveBen Rollo4 p.m.EightWilderness DriveRick Andrade1 p.m.FiveWoodland AvenueBig Shaney Tunes1 p.m.NineWoodmans CourtDKHB Duo4 p.m.FourZellers DriveMarc & Murray1 p.m.Two
Neighbours Day 2025
Subscribe to this page to get an email when these applications open for Neighbours Day 2025:
become a musicianbecome a music ambassadorget on the map
Photo gallery
Check out some photos of past Neighbours Day events below.
Photo Gallery: Neighbours Day will appear here on the public site.


Title: View our Engineering page
Quick Links
Site alterationOur site alteration bylaw controls certain kinds of changes to a property.
Site certificationFor projects with a site plan, we check that it has been implemented properly.
Off-site worksGet a permit to do construction work on a city or regional right of way.
Driveway wideningGet a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.
Site alteration
Our site alteration bylaw controls certain kinds of changes to a property.
Site certification
For projects with a site plan, we check that it has been implemented properly.
Off-site works
Get a permit to do construction work on a city or regional right of way.
Driveway widening
Get a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.


Title: View our Conflict of interest page
Submit a conflict of interest
Use our form to submit a conflict of interest online.
Online registry
Past term registries are available online:
2014-20182018-2022
Mayor and council declarations
We will add declared conflicts of interest to the accordions below as they are declared.
Mayor - Berry VrbanovicFebruary 27, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: OPA22/02/F/BB & ZBA22/02/F/BB - 142-146 Fergus Avenuegeneral nature of conflict: I own property within the circulation area for the properties in question.February 13, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: 5.1 - OPA22/02/F/BB & ZBA22/02/F/BB - 142-146 Fergus Avenuegeneral nature of conflict: I own property within the circulation area for the said application.Ward 1 - Scott DaveyMarch 20, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter:Official Plan Amendment OPA21/009/K/AP and Zoning By-law Amendment ZBA21/014/K/AP, 4396 King Street East & 25 Sportsworld Drive, Sportsworld Shopping Centre and Taylorwood Park Homes Inc, DSD-2023-021general nature of conflict: My spouse's placeofemployment is the adjacent property (Costco Wholesale)March 6, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter:Official Plan Amendment OPA21/009/K/AP and Zoning By-law Amendment ZBA21/014/K/AP, 4396 King Street East & 25 Sportsworld Drive, Sportsworld Shopping Centre and Taylorwood Park Homes Inc, DSD-2023-021general nature of conflict: My spouse's placeofemployment is adjacent to this property.Ward 2 - Dave SchniderNone at this time.Ward 3 - Jason DeneaultFebruary 26, 2024 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: 2.3 lower doon in Camera sessiongeneral nature of conflict: My spouse works at Conestoga College.February 12, 2024 - City Councilsubject matter: Pinnacle Drive/Lower Doongeneral nature of conflict: My spouse works at Conestoga CollegeJanuary 22, 2024 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: Pinnacle Drive/Lower Doongeneral nature of conflict: My spouse works at Conestoga College.November 6, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: 6.3general nature of conflict: My wife works at the collegeOctober 30, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: Lower Doongeneral nature of conflict: My wife works at Conestoga College.Ward 4 - Christine MichaudFebruary 13, 2023 - Community and Infrastructure Services Committeesubject matter: Biehn Drive Extension Item 5.1general nature of conflict: A family member lives in close proximity to this projectWard 5 - Ayo OwodunniFebruary 12, 2024 - City Councilsubject matter: 86 Pinnacle Drive, Kitchenergeneral nature of conflict: I work at Conestoga College as a part time instructor. Conestoga is close to the area.January 22, 2024 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: 86 Pinnacle Drivegeneral nature of conflict: I am a part time instructor at Conestoga CollegeOctober 30, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: Matters being discussed, in reference to Official Plan Amendment Application OPA23/013/K/JZ, Zoning By-law Amendment Application ZBA23/232/K/JZ, Lower Doon Land Use Study, DSD-2023-434.general nature of conflict: I work at Conestoga College as a Part Time ProfessorWard 6 - Paul SinghOctober 16, 2023 - Special Councilsubject matter: Potential Land Acquisition and Disposition (Land Acquisition and Disposition - Section 239 (c))general nature of conflict: Due to family owning property within the vicinity the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.October 2, 2023 - Special Councilsubject matter: Potential Land Acquisition (Land Acquisition - Section 239 (c))general nature of conflict: Due to family owning property within the vicinity the subject property & report and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.September 25, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: Zoning By-law Amendment Application ZBA23/032/V/CD, Lifting of Holding Provision 43H, 120 Victoria Street South, Glovebox (2019) Incgeneral nature of conflict: Due to I and my family owning property within the vicinity the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.September 25, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: Official Plan Amendment Application OPA22/004/V/KA, Zoning By-law Amendment Application ZBA22/006/V/KA, 130-142 Victoria Street South, 1936026 Ontario Inc., DSD-2023-365 .general nature of conflict: On the agenda this date as I and a members of my family owns property in the 240 meter public notice vicinity of the subject property.September 18, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: OPA22/004/V/KA, Zoning By-law Amendment Application ZBA22/006/V/KA, 130-142 Victoria Street South, 1936026 Ontario Inc.general nature of conflict: Due to I and family owning property within the vicinity the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.September 18, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: Zoning By-law Amendment Application ZBA23/032/V/CD, Lifting of Holding Provision 43H, 120 Victoria Street South, Glovebox (2019) Incgeneral nature of conflict: Due to family owning property within the vicinity the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.August 14, 2023 - Special Councilsubject matter: Fire Station Development (Land Acquisition - Section 239 (c))general nature of conflict: Due to family owning property within the vicinity the subject property and discussion. Did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.June 26, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: "Official Plan Amendment Application OPA23/003/V/CD, and Zoning By-law Amendment Application ZBA23/007/MV/CD, 97-101 Park Street and 186-194 Victoria Street South, 1928393 Ontario Inc., DSD-2023-236, Item 7.2.a."general nature of conflict: Due to I and my family owning property within the 240 meter public notice vicinity of the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter or the necessary By-laws.May 8, 2023 - Special Councilsubject matter: Item 5.1 on the Special Council agenda earlier this date, declared a pecuniary interest regarding Affordable Housing Initiative (Information explicitly supplied in confidence to the municipality or local board by Canada, a province or territory or a Crown agency - Section 239 (h)) listed as item 5.1 on the Special Council agenda earlier this date, "general nature of conflict: As I and my family owns property in the vicinity of the subject report and nature there of.May 8, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: "Official Plan Amendment OPA22/001/K/KA, Zoning Bylaw Amendment, King-Charles Properties (Kitchener) Limited, 1001 King Street East, DSD-2023-151"general nature of conflict: As my family owns property in the vicinity of the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion regarding thismatter.April 24, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: "Official Plan Amendment OPA22/001/K/KA, Zoning Bylaw Amendment, King-Charles Properties (Kitchener) Limited, 1001 King Street East, DSD-2023-151"general nature of conflict: Due to a family member owning property within the 240 meter public notice vicinity.March 20, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: "Official Plan Amendment and Zoning By-law Amendment - 146-162 Victoria Street South and 92-110 Park Street"general nature of conflict: Due to I and family members owning property within the 240 meter public notice vicinity of the subject property and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter.March 20, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: Community Centre Redevelopment (Land Acquisition-Disposition - Section 239 (c))general nature of conflict: Due to I and a family member owning property within the vicinity and did not participate in any voting or discussion on the matter.February 27, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: "Ontario Land Tribunal Matter (declared a conflict with regards to Settlement of a Matter Before the Ontario Land Tribunal that was arising for Council consideration this date, which was also considered as item 2.5 on the Special Council agenda earlier this date)"general nature of conflict: As I and my family owns property in the vicinity of the subject report and direction sought.February 2, 2023 - Special Councilsubject matter: Connaught St, Mill St, 620304006 Mill/Courtland community centregeneral nature of conflict: Due to I and my family members owning property in the vicinity of the subject project and report.January 23, 2023 - Special Councilsubject matter: Engineering - Two Engineering Reconstruction projects noted in Appendix B page B37, 901004027 Mill St - Stirling B38 and 901004085 Connaught St - Ninth to Traynor to Ottawageneral nature of conflict: Due to I and family members owning property within the vicinity of the projects.Ward 7 - Bil IoannidisNone at this time.Ward 8 - Margaret JohnstonJune 13, 2024 - Finance and Corporate Services Committeesubject matter: Bramm Yards Discussiongeneral nature of conflict: Discussion was held around looking into partnerships with the University of Waterloo and their Health Innovation Arena initiative next door. I work at the University of WaterlooJanuary 22, 2024 - City Council meetingsubject matter: Committee of the Whole: Dog Designation ADMINISTRATIVE REPORTS Dog Designation Appeal - Adams, COR-2024-058general nature of conflict: I Know one of the people involvedAugust 14, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee meetingsubject matter: 5.3 Collaboration Space in the UW Innovation Arena, DSD-2023-328general nature of conflict: due to my employment at the University of WaterlooWard 9 - Debbie ChapmanNone at this time.Ward 10 - Stephanie StretchJanuary 29, 2024 - City Councilsubject matter: MTSA Study areageneral nature of conflict: I live and own property (118 and 112 Young St) in and close to the MTSA study area.January 22, 2024 - City Councilsubject matter: Heritage Item #2 - 21 Weber St.general nature of conflict: I live and own property at (118 and 112 Young St. ) close to the subject matter.Ward 10 - Aislinn ClancySeptember 25, 2023 - City Councilsubject matter: item 7.2a, 11.2.ageneral nature of conflict: I own property in close proximity to the Shanley street development.September 18, 2023 - Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committeesubject matter: 3.1 consent itemsgeneral nature of conflict: I own property in close proximity of the development in question.December 19, 2022 - City Council meetingsubject matter: item 7.2Fgeneral nature of conflict: My parents live/own a property close to the proposed development.December 19, 2022 - Special Council meetingsubject matter: land transfer - item 4.2general nature of conflict: I am an employee of the organization in question.December 12, 2022 - Special Council meetingsubject matter: 2.2 - land transfergeneral nature of conflict: I am employed by the the organization in question.December 12, 2022 - Special Council meetingsubject matter: development at 4220 King St. and 25 Sports World Crossing rd.general nature of conflict: My parent's home is in close proximity of the development.
Committee member declarations
We will add declared conflicts of interest to the accordions below as they are declared.
Heritage KitchenerIlona Bodendorfer - May 7, 2024 meetingsubject matter: 4.2 Draft Heritage Impact Assessment (HIA) - Hidden Valley Secondary Plan – Land Use Implementation Project , DSD-2024-193general nature of conflict: Close family member owns property in adjacent subdivision.Andrew Portengen - April 2, 2024 meetingsubject matter: 4.3 Notice of Intention to Designate - 10 Duke Street West under Part IV of the Ontario Heritage Act, DSD-2024-133general nature of conflict: Potential conflict on this item as my employer (WalterFedy) is involved in the development project as the Civil Engineer.Andrew Portengen - February 6, 2024 meetingsubject matter: Item 4.1 Heritage Permit Application-2024-IV-01, 25 Joseph Street, Replacement of Windows, DSD-2024-052general nature of conflict: I am a member of the Board of Directors for Kitchener Housing Inc. which is the owner of the subject property.Committee of AdjustmentRobert McColl - January 16, 2024 meetingsubject matter: B2023-042 A2023-135 A2023-136 52 Edgehill Dr.general nature of conflict: Applicant is an adjacent neighbourScott Hannah - December 12, 2023 meetingsubject matter: A 2023-142 807 Frederick Streetgeneral nature of conflict: I am the Project Manager retained by the Owner to achieve Site Plan Approval and assist with the redevelopment of the subject lands.Bob McColl - November 21, 2023 meetingsubject matter: DSD-2023-498 52 Edgehill Dr.general nature of conflict: I am an adjacent neighbourDouglas Pateman - March 21, 2023 meetingsubject matter: 709 Glasgow St, Kitchener, ON N2M 2N7general nature of conflict: Conflicted out from work.Scott Hannah - March 21, 2023 meetingsubject matter: B2023-011 A2023 -038 131 St. George Streetgeneral nature of conflict: My Son owns the property next door on Cedar Street and is the most affected by the proposed development.Brian Santos - March 21, 2023 meetingsubject matter: A 2022-126 - 44 Rusholme Road, DSD-2023-119general nature of conflict: Friendofthe owners. I live nearby (one street over).David Gundrum - March 21, 2023 meetingsubject matter: B 2023-011 & A 2023-038 - 131 St. George Streetgeneral nature of conflict: My family and I live on the same street and same block as the subject property.Brian Santos - January 17, 2023 meetingsubject matter: A 2022-126 - 44 Rusholme Road, DSD-2022-460general nature of conflict: Personally know the owners of this property.Brian Santos - January 17, 2023 meetingsubject matter: A 2023-008 - 36 Orchard Park Crescent, DSD-2023-044general nature of conflict: My parents are the immediate neighbours.Downtown Kitchener BIADarryl Moore - May 24, 2023 meetingsubject matter: Budget Voting / Discussions Line - see belowgeneral nature of conflict: I will declare a conflict of interest when discussing and voting on the 2024 budget line items specifically relating to " ANY FUNDS granted to the City of Kitchener for Canada Day and for Way Back Concert". My company has been hired to manage and operate the beer gardens for these 2 events.Economic Development Advisory CommitteeJason Malfara - November 22, 2023 meetingsubject matter: Major Transit Station Area Planning Frameworkgeneral nature of conflict: I own property within the study boundaries.Property standards committeeCyrus Medina - December 14, 2022 meetingsubject matter: Appeal 2022-09 - 188 Highland road westgeneral nature of conflict: I live in a property along Patricia Ave Kitchener adjacent to 188 Highland Road west.


Title: View our Driveway widening page
Apply for a permit
You need a permit to widen the driveway apron/boulevard beyond your property lines or to cut the curb. If you cut the curb or widen the driveway onto city land without a permit, you may have to pay a fine.
Please apply for a permit at least 15 business days before you plan to start the project.
Your application must include:
property addresscontractor name and contact informationproposed width of driveway once completedexpected construction dates
If you're not sure if you need a permit, pleasesend us an emailor call519-741-2426.
Apply online
Use ouronline formto apply for a permit.
Permit cost
A driveway widening permit costs $375. We refund $230 when the project is complete, making the final cost $145. If your property is on a regional road, more rules apply.
Driveway extension bylaws
When cutting the curb or widening a driveway apron/boulevard, you cannot:
remove on-street parkingremove or harm street trees
Properties on regional roads
If your property is on a regional road, there may be an extra cost of $100. You will need to apply for and obtain a Regional Access Permit and Regional Work Permit.Apply for both permitsthrough the Region of Waterloo. We will not approve a curb cut on a regional road without these permits.
Some regional roads are Access Regulated Prohibited (such as parts of Fischer-Hallman), and any change to an access on those roads could require a report to Regional Council for their permission. Our staff will work with you to make sure your project is meeting the Region’s requirements.
Maximum driveway width
For single detached houses, the maximum driveway width is generally 50% of your lot width to a maximum of 8 metres.
For single detached houses within ourcentral neighbourhoods, the maximum driveway width is generally 40% of your lot width to a maximum of 8 metres.Send us an emailif your property is within ourcentral neighbourhoodsand you want to confirm the maximum driveway width.
Attached garages
If your home has an attached garage, the driveway must be at least 1.2 metres from the side property line.
Some driveways on properties with an attached garage can be located 0.6 metres from the side property line.Send us an emailto confirm your property's requirement.
Materials
When you are widening a driveway, you must use the same material as the existing driveway.
The driveway must be a different material from sidewalks or other walkways.
Contractors
You must hire a licensed contractor to widen your curb. If you hire a different contractor before you start the project, pleaselet us know.


Title: Visit our contact us page
Online
Send us an emailif you have a question or concern.
Report a problem
If you see something listed below that needs our attention,report a problem online.
graffitineedleslitter in a playground, park or trailparkingproperty standardspotholessidewalk show clearingsidewalk trip hazardstrail surface maintenance
If you see a sign that does not comply with oursign bylaw, you canreport it online.
If your concern is not listed, it may fall under theRegion of Waterlooor another organization.
Visit ourcoyotes and wildlife pagefor information about:
sick, injured or orphaned animalsdead animalspests
Social media
Follow us on social media for updates and things to do:
FacebookTwitterInstagram
MyKitchener
Create a freeMyKitcheneraccount to:
build and customize a personalized dashboardget notifications for upcoming registration dates (including summer camps!)report a problem and get updates from staffmanage your property tax and utility bills
Signing up for an account takes less than 5 minutes! You can login to MyKitchener from your computer, tablet or phone.
Create a MyKitchener account
Phone and TTY
City of Kitchener
519-741-2345: report an issue or ask us a question1-866-969-9994: use our TTY system for deaf and hard of hearing callers
Multi-language interpretation supportis available by phone.
Waterloo Region Police Services (WRPS)
911: in an emergency519-570-9777: not in an emergency or to file a noise complaint1-888-420-1777: use the WRPS TTY system for deaf and hard of hearing callers
Please note that if you see someone experiencing a mental health crisis, the WRPS is the only service that can offer an immediate response.
WRPS may dispatch officers in non-emergencies. WRPS is piloting theIntegrated Mobile Police and Crisis Team (IMPACT), where mental health workers accompany police at their discretion between 8 a.m. to midnight.
In person
Kitchener City Hall is located at 200 King Street West in downtown Kitchener.
Customer service
City Hall is open for in-person services from Monday to Friday between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m. at our main floor City Hall Service Centre. Staff from all City Hall service areas are available to serve you from one central, accessible location.
When you arrive at City Hall, staff will be available to check you in for your appointment or service request or check in at one of our convenient self-serve kiosks.
If you want to plan your visit and reduce your waiting time, pleasebook an appointment.
Multi-language and American Sign Language (ASL) interpretation supportis available in person at City Hall.
Hours of operation
The building is open during these hours:
Monday to Friday: 7 a.m. to 9 p.m.weekends and statutory holidays: 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
Parking and transit
However you get downtown, there are options available:transitvehicle and bike parkingplan your routeTransitHop off the ION at either the Kitchener City Hall or Victoria Park station for a quick walk. Central Station is a short walk away, as well.TheseGRTbus routes stop nearby:route 7route 8route 20iXpress 204Vehicle and bike parkingParking is available in the City Hall parking garage, as well as other City of Kitchener parking lots around Downtown Kitchener. Visit ourparking locations pageto find somewhere to park.Securebike parkingis available in the City Hall parking garage.You can pay for parking in surface lots through thePassport Parking app.Download the app, available both on iOS & Android.Plan your routeCheckroad closureson your route before coming downtown.
Transit
Hop off the ION at either the Kitchener City Hall or Victoria Park station for a quick walk. Central Station is a short walk away, as well.
TheseGRTbus routes stop nearby:
route 7route 8route 20iXpress 204
Vehicle and bike parking
Parking is available in the City Hall parking garage, as well as other City of Kitchener parking lots around Downtown Kitchener. Visit ourparking locations pageto find somewhere to park.
Securebike parkingis available in the City Hall parking garage.
You can pay for parking in surface lots through thePassport Parking app.Download the app, available both on iOS & Android.
Plan your route
Checkroad closureson your route before coming downtown.
Field trips
We offer free City Hall tours as field trips! Learn more on ourschool tours page.
Mail
Our mailing address is:
City of KitchenerPO Box 1118Kitchener, ONCanada N2G 4G7
Multi-language interpretation support
Click the "Translate" button at the top of any page on this website to translate the page.
As part of our commitment to delivering an excellent customer service experience for all citizens, service in city facilities is available in over 200 languages including, at City Hall only, American Sign Language (ASL).
You can access on-demand language interpretation support 24-7 by phone, or in-person duringbusiness hours. On the spot, staff will connect you to an interpreter in the language of your choice to help you.
For in-person visits, staff and customers can actively listen and participate in a call with an interpreter in the language of your choice, using two-way handsets available at our service counters.
At City Hall, you can also access support by video in the language of your choice, including ASL. We hope to bring this service to more facilities in the future, so subscribe to this page to get email updates.
Interpretation services are currently available in-person at:
all City Hall service counters(including for Kitchener Utilities inquiries)community centresindoor poolsarenascemeteries
Bylaw and fire staff are also trained and can provide on-site interpretation help.
By phone
Call519-741-2345to access interpretation services by phone.For service by phone, staff will add an interpreter in the language of your choice to your call.
Important notice
While more than 200 languages are available for on-demand interpretation support, some are more difficult to provide due to the limited number of interpreters available for these languages. As a result, interpretation for these languages will need to be handled with a scheduled appointment. They include:
AkanBajuniBravaneseDutchEstonianJavaneseKanjobalKibembeMacedonianQ'uiche (Q'eqchi)SangoSaraikiSoninkeSwedishSylhetyTshiluba
Please call519-741-2345orsend us an emailwith your contact information, the language you would like to get service in and a date and time you are available for the call. Service can often be provided same day or within 24 hours. If you want to speak to bylaw staff, pleaseemail our bylaw enforcement divisionwith the same information.
Staff contacts
In ourstaff directory, you can find contact information for city departments and teams.
To learn about our staff structure, visit ourcity departments page.
Contact your city councillor
If you want to contact city council, you canemail all of city councilor your ward's city councillor:
ward one:Councillor Scott Daveyward two:Councillor Dave Schniderward three:Councillor Jason Deneaultward four:Christine Michaudward five:Councillor Ayo Owodunniward six:Councillor Paul Singhward seven:Councillor Bil Ioannidisward eight:Councillor Margaret Johnstonward nine:Councillor Debbie Chapmanward ten:Councillor Stephanie Stretch
Not sure who your city councillor is? Use our online tool to find your ward and councillor.
Find your city councillor
Feedback about city services
Tell us about your experience with us, our processes, decisions, services and staff. We use your feedback to monitor and improve our services for the benefit of all residents.
We try to resolve all complaints but cannot guarantee all complainants will be satisfied with the resolution.
Visit ourfeedback about city services pageto learn more.
Region of Waterloo
Please contact the Region of Waterloo for the topics listed below:
public healthhousingwaste managementtraffic signalspublic transitsocial and community servicesprovincial and regional bylaws
Region of Waterloo contact information
phone:519-575-4400TTY:519-575-4608
Contact the Region of Waterloo
Harm reduction: mental health and substance use
Region of Waterloo Public Health and Emergency Services
phone:519-575-4400TTY:519-575-4608website
Here 24/7 - Addictions, Mental Health & Crisis Services Waterloo-Wellington
One-stop connection to local mental health, addiction, and crisis services agencies.
phone:1-844-437-3247TTY:1-877-688-5501website
Sanguen Health Centre
Ministry of Health funded Hepatitis C agency, providing wrap around support to those experiencing high degrees of marginalization as a result of their substance use, mental health, homelessness, and chronic poverty.
phone:519-603-0223toll free:1-877-351-9857, ext. 1website


Title: Understanding city planning
Quick Links
Neighbourhood development guideRegulations, city processes and permits, build approvals and public involvement.
Current planning applicationsMap with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Walking toursWalk, explore and experience Kitchener's rich history, culture and diversity.
Land development applicationsLinks to development resources to help with your project.
Land use planning and development videosLearn how our community grows through planning and development.
Building and renovatingBuilding permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.
Neighbourhood development guide
Regulations, city processes and permits, build approvals and public involvement.
Current planning applications
Map with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Walking tours
Walk, explore and experience Kitchener's rich history, culture and diversity.
Land development applications
Links to development resources to help with your project.
Land use planning and development videos
Learn how our community grows through planning and development.
Building and renovating
Building permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.


Title: View our Tree conservation and management page
About tree conservation and management
Our approach to tree conservation and management is guided by these documents:
tree conservation bylaw: preserving local trees through rules around tree removal and promoting good forestry and arboricultural practicestree management policy: guidance around how we protect and enhance the tree canopy in KitchenerSustainable Urban Forest Strategy: our guiding document for planning, engaging, maintaining, protecting and planting Kitchener’s urban forest
Visit theInternational Society of Arboriculture's websiteto learn about:
benefits of treeshow to properly care for trees in the urban environment
Tree removal
Choose the situation that applies to you:
removing or pruning a tree on a private propertyremoving trees during development
Removing or pruning a tree on a private property
You may need a tree conservation permit to remove a tree from a property that is larger than 0.405 hectares or one acre.
You do not need a permit for:
removing trees that are less than 10 cm in diameter at chest heightremoving dead, diseased or hazardous trees when certified as such by an individual designated or approved by our director of planningremoving damaged or destroyed tree when certified as such by an individual designated or approved by our director of planning, where the removal is in the interest of public safety, health or general welfare following any man-made or natural disasters, storms, high winds, floods, fires, snowfall or freezesremoving trees located within five metres (16.4 feet) of an occupied buildingwhen a building permit has already been issued for the work
pruning a tree, as long as the pruning is done in a manner that does not harm the tree
If you’re not sure if you need a permit,send us an email.
Request a permit
Follow these steps to request a tree conservation permit:
download theapplication formcomplete the application form and collect the required materials (listed below)send the application form and required materials to staffby email
Your application must include:
a fully completed application forma copy of a detailed plan or surveypayment of the required feewritten consent from adjacent property owners if trees straddle a property line (if applicable)
If all the trees you’re removing are dead, dying or hazardous, contact our planning division to see if you need a permit.
Removing trees during development
When removing trees as part of the development of a piece of land, we will need:
a general vegetation overviewa detailed vegetation plan or tree preservation plan
You must include these documents in your development application.
Trees on private property
Find information about trees on private property:
backyard tree planting programproperty standards
Backyard tree planting program
Do you want to add a new tree to your backyard? We're working withReep Green Solutionsto plant trees in backyards at a reduced price.
The backyard tree planting program includes:
personalized property consultationone or two native treesdelivery and full planting servicecare and maintenance guide
Learn more and apply onReep's website.
Property standards
We do not get involved in disputes between neighbours about overhanging branches or tree maintenance. For information about the property standards that are enforced, please visit ourproperty standards page.
Trees on public property
Find information about trees on public property:
city-owned treesrequest a tree on public propertystructural pruningtree safety issues
City-owned trees
Trees located within road rights-of-way, boulevards and parks are city-owned. Caring for and removing those trees is our responsibility. Damaging or removing these trees can result in criminal charges.
If you’re unsure if a tree is ours, call us at519-741-2345orsend us an email.
Open the accordions below to learn about our service levels for different types of public tree maintenance.
Tree maintenanceArborists are working year-round to maintain and prune our trees. We are working to establish a proactive block pruning program where we can prune each street every 7 to 10 years.Tree removalsIf we need to remove a tree because it is a risk or hazard to the public, we will remove the tree as soon as possible. We will try to make contact with the neighbouring property owner to make them aware. In some cases where trees are larger, we will remove the branches, or crown, of the tree first, and the stem remains standing until we can remove it later with other specialized equipment.Stump removalsAfter we remove a tree, the next step is to remove the stump. This typically occurs the year after tree removal or, in some cases, within the same year.Tree plantingIf the area where the stump is removed can fit a new tree, we will plant a replacement tree. Our goal is to plant the replacement tree within two years of the removal of the original tree, but this timeline can vary. Our team will select the replacement species of tree based on various factors and considerations though in some cases due to site factors like utility lines, or limited space, we may be unable to replant in the same boulevard location.
Request a tree on public property
Do you want to add a tree to your neighbourhood or on the boulevard in front of your home? Submit your request throughour online formor call519-741-2345. If we can plant a tree in your preferred location, we’ll let you know and add the tree to an upcoming tree planting season.
Structural pruning
Our forestry staff do structural pruning on city trees to help them grow into healthy, mature trees. Structural pruning helps increase tree health, longevity and resiliency to climate change.
In forests, trees develop a strong branch structure because they grow near each other. The shade created by other trees limits the growth of lower limbs. In the city, where there are a lot of single trees, the amount of sunlight lets them grow competing branches. This type of tree structure is vulnerable to breakage and can reduce the tree’s life expectancy. Trees with one dominant stem and well-spaced branches are more likely to thrive for a long time.
After we do structural pruning, the trees will have fewer branches and look less full. This is a part of the process and is not a cause for concern. Pruning happens over years and helps develop a strong, resilient branch structure.
Tree safety issues
If you have a concern or question about a city tree, please call us at519-741-2345orsend us an email. We specifically want to know about tree risk issues, including dead or dangerous-looking trees or other safety issues.
Invasive species
Invasive species, includingemerald ash borersandspongy moths, threaten the health of our urban forest. Our strategy gives direction for monitoring, preventing and managing the impacts of invasive species.
For more information, visit theGrand River Conservation Authority pageabout invasive species or get involved by mapping and reporting invasive species in Ontario through theEDD Maps Program.
Our urban forest
In January 2022, city council approved a tree canopy target of 30% in each ward by 2050 and a target of 33% across Kitchener by 2070. This targeted approach to growing the tree canopy over time will involve new tree planting, as well as increasing the maintenance of existing trees.
Check out oururban forest mapto see upcoming and ongoing forestry work around the city. We’re using this map to share information about tree planting, street tree pruning, tree removals and more.
Open the urban forest map
During street tree pruning work, we may need to do emergency tree removals for public safety reasons. In these cases, we cannot provide advanced notice to nearby residents.
Chandler Mowat tree canopy
We're working with Reep Green Solutions on an pilot project to increase the tree canopy in the Chandler Mowat neighbourhood. This neighbourhood has low canopy coverage when compared to Kitchener’s average. The project will support new tree planting on private and public property, and maintain existing trees across the neighbourhood. It is funded by the Green Communities Canada (GCC)’s Living Cities Fund.
Visit ourEngage Kitchener pageto learn more and get involved.


Title: View our Planning resources page
Plans
community plansgrowth managementheritage district plansOfficial PlanPlaces to Grow (provincial growth plan)Strategic Plan for the Environment
Manuals
development manualurban design manual
Policies and bylaws
emergency service policytree conservation and managementzoning bylaw
Studies and reports
Commercial Policy Review – project summary reportDevelopment charges background studyEnvironmental impact studyNatural heritage system background report
Other resources
public art for developerssite alterationsustainability statement


Title: View our Residential dwelling units page
About dwelling units
Under zoning bylaw 2019-051, a dwelling unit is a building that contains a room or suite of habitable rooms that:
is in a residential or mixed-use buildingis occupied or designed to be occupied by a household as a single, independent and separate housekeeping establishmenthas both a kitchen and bathroom used or designed to be used for the exclusive common use of its occupantshas a private entrance directly from the outside of the building or a common hallway or stairway inside the building
The process on this page applies to residential buildings with five to 10 total residential units.
Visit these pages for information about:
residential buildings with two to four total units:additional dwelling unitsbuildings or properties with more than 10 residential units and non-residential uses:site plans
Types of projects
There are three types of projects you can build with five to 10 residential units:
multiple dwellings: a building with five or more dwelling unitsstreet townhouse: a building divided vertically into three or more dwelling units (as the principal use of the building) by common walls that prevent internal access between dwelling unitscluster townhouse: a site with several buildings each divided vertically into three or more dwelling units (as the principal use of the building) by common walls that prevent internal access between dwelling units
Application process
The application process for multi-unit residential buildings has two parts:
zoning confirmationbuilding permit
You do not need to complete the site plan application process for residential buildings with four to 10 total units that do not contain other uses within the building or on the property.
If you have any questions, pleasesend us an emailor call519-741-2317.
Zoning confirmation
To confirm that your property is zoned for a multi-unit residential building, you must request azoning (occupancy) certificate.
In your application, you must include:
completed application formproperty surveyzoning plan (fully dimensioned, showing the property lines, existing and proposed buildings, building setbacks and parking spaces)fully dimensioned floor plans indicating all the uses of the spaceselevation drawingsexisting building drawings
Building permit
Visit ourresidential building permits pagefor requirements and application information.
Resources
These resources may help with your project:
official planzoning bylawdevelopment manualurban design manualheritage permits and guidelinesemergency service policytree management policy


Title: View our Your home and property page
Quick Links
Property standardsAll property owners must follow our standards for maintenance and occupancy.
Encroachment issuesHelp us protect our city by not encroaching on city property.
TermitesOur termite bylaw and information about termite environments.
Property standards
All property owners must follow our standards for maintenance and occupancy.
Encroachment issues
Help us protect our city by not encroaching on city property.
Termites
Our termite bylaw and information about termite environments.


Title: View our Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek page
About the review
The Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhood planning review includes:
the existing Cedar Hill Secondary Plan areapart of the Mill Courtland-Woodside Park Secondary Plan area
This new area is proposed to become the new Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek Secondary Plan.
We shared these changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information:
Appendix Document
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Community engagement materials
Here’s the information we shared with neighbourhood residents during our open houses:
staff presentationexisting & proposed land use3-D renderingsneighbourhood charactercultural heritageinformation panels
Earlier community engagement
We held an open house to get feedback from the community on November 20, 2018. Use the links below to find information we presented at the open house:
notice of open housestaff presentationinformation panels
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
existing land use mapexisting zoning mapexisting zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)urban design guidelines
Proposed Official Plan policies and land use
proposed secondary plan policiesproposed applicable Official Plan policiesproposed land useland use typologiesproposed revised urban structureproposed revised cultural heritage resourcesproposed integrated transportation system
Proposed zoning
proposed zoning mapzoning typologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and Stackingmap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions


Title: View our Residential intensification in established neighbourhoods study page
Project updates
Thefinal report recommendationswere approved by council on March 20, 2017. Since that time, staff has completed the following:
Public information and awareness - A educational guide is has now been published to provide more information on the development process and how citizens can provide feedback. Paper copies are available at City Hall, 6th Floor, Planning Division or check out theonlineversion.Process enhancements - Signs are now posted on the property for Committee of Adjustment applications city-wide.New zoning rules for the location of garages and front yard setbacks are now in effect. ViewBy-law 2018-094- Implementation of specific Residential Intensification in Established Neighbourhoods (RIENS) Recommendations.
Staff is currently working on the following items:
Zoning changes - these changes are being addressed through theComprehensive Review of the Zoning By-law (CRoZBy) projectUrban design manualupdates for infill projects are underway.Neighbourhood planning reviewshave been initiated
Background
Results of study
RIENS Final Report - Approved March 20, 2017The RIENS final report and recommendations was presented to the planning & strategic initiatives committee on Monday, March 6 at 6 p.m followed by Council's decision on March 20. Implementation of the RIENS recommendations will occur over the next few years.
Staff reportAddendum staff report
Send us an emailto download a copy of these documents:
Final reportWhat we heard - consolidated feedback
Public engagement
The public was engaged throughout this project as outlined below:
Public meeting - March 8, 2016An introductory public meeting was held on March 8 to provide an overview of the project and answer questions from the public about the process.
presentation materials from the public meetingquestions asked (with responses) and comments from the public meeting
Stakeholder meetings - April 6, June 23, and Nov. 3, 2016The stakeholder group was made up of individuals who expressed an interest in participating in more in depth conversations about the project. A summary of stakeholder session discussions is included in the consolidated feedback.
Issues and options report - May 16, 2016The Issues and Options Report was tabled at a council strategy session.  The purpose of this report is to:
Provide the Kitchener context (state of intensification, how development is currently approved).Review other practices (how other municipalities address development in established neighbourhoods).Provide analysis of different practices/options in the form of a "menu" of options - meaning the recommended approach could be a combination of more than one option.
This report provides the background information and discussion of options that led into the next phase of community engagement.Send us an emailto download a copy of the Issues & Options Report.
Public workshop - June 14, 2016The first public workshop was an interactive session to get citizen feedback about top priorities for ensuring compatibility in the study area and what options should be considered to make new development compatible with the neighborhood.
Bus tour - Oct. 4, 2016A bus tour of the study area was held to provide an opportunity for members of council and the community to hear how new development may affect parts of the study area and how options could relate to different neighbourhoods.Send us an emailto download a copy of the booklet provided at the tour.
Public workshop - Oct. 27, 2016A public workshop was held to give an overview of the draft recommended approach and receive feedback from the public on the approach.
Digital survey - Nov 1-Dec. 13, 2016Residents were asked to provide feedback throughEngage Kitchener. Thanks to those who provided input.
Study area
The study is focusing on the central and Vanier neighbourhoods as outlined in red on themap of the study area.
The study area boundaries are as follows:
Central neighbourhood:
Westmount Road (west)Conestoga Parkway (south and east)City of Waterloo boundary (north)
Vanier neighbourhood:
Conestoga Parkway (north)Highway 8 (east)Fairway Road (south)Courtland Avenue (west)
As a city, we want to have an effective process in place to ensure development is done right. Input from the community is essential to help us make decisions about the process for reviewing and approving development applications including when and how much consultation should take place.


Title: View our Business licences page
Apply for or renew a licence online
You can apply for or renew a business licence online. Visit ouronline services portalto get started.
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call519-741-2275.
Business licensing bylaw
Businesses in Kitchener may need a business licence. Ourbusiness licensing bylawsoutline the requirements of each category of business Inspections from planning, fire, public health, building, and plumbing may be required and will be arranged by staff.
Apply for a business licence
If you are opening one of the businesses listed below, you need toapply for a business licence.
When applying for a licence, these general conditions apply:
licences are non-transferablebusinesses that fall into multiple categories may need multiple licencesbusiness licences expire on March 31 (regardless of application date)standard processing time is two to three weeks, depending on inspection requirements
Businesses that need a business licence are listed below.
Permanent businesses
adult entertainment parlouralternative massage centrebeauty salon or barber shopcommercial kitchensconvenience storedriving schoolfarmers’ marketfireworks vendorfood shoplaundrette or dry cleanerlodging housemotor vehicle facilitynightclubold goldpayday loan establishmentpermanent vendorpet care establishmentpet shopplace of amusementpublic halltheatre
Temporary and mobile businesses
auctioneerbuskerscontractorsfood truckmobile businesspop-up shoprefreshment vehiclespecial eventsstreet vendortemporary vendor
Visit ourapplication pageto learn more about each business type and apply for a licence.
Renew a business licence
Most business licences expire on March 31. Late fees begin on April 1.  Renewal notices with instructions are mailed out beginning in February and the expiry date is always listed on your licence.
Renewal payments
You can make a renewal payment:
onlinein person –book an appointmentto help plan your visitby mail – mail a cheque made out to City of Kitchener and your renewal notice to Licensing Services atCity Hall
Other licences and permits
You may need more than a business licence to start your business. Other licences and permits include:
building permitsliquor licencesspecial occasion permitslottery licenceszoning occupancy certificate
Liquor licences
If you’re serving alcohol at your business, you will need to apply for a liquor licence through the AGCO. Before you apply, you’ll need aMunicipal Information formsigned and approved by the manager of licensing.
After you have the form signed and approved by the manager of licensing,send it to staff by email.
We will review your request and commission this form for you. This process costs $20.
Extend your liquor licence
If you want to temporarily extend your liquor licence, we will review your request and give you a Non-objection Letter.
AGCO - Agency Approval Letters
Based on your situation, contact the appropriate group below:
new and existing business not under a building permit:fire preventionnew and existing business under a building permit:building
Special occasion permits
If you’re applying for a special occasion permit (SOP) through the AGCO, you’ll need a Municipal Significance Sign-off.Send us an emailto request our sign-off.
We will review your request and determine whether your event falls into this category. If it does, we will give you a signed letter for the SOP application.


Title: Doon Valley Golf Course
Location
Address:500 Doon Valley Drive, Kitchener, Ontario
Phone number: 519-741-2949
Get directions
There is construction on Doon Valley Drive, scheduled to be complete in May 2024. Plan your route and check ourroad closures mapbefore leaving to avoid delays.
18-hole course
Doon Valley's 18-hole course offers a challenging layout amid expansive natural wetlands. Several holes on this mature course run alongside the Grand River. You may even see an occasional eagle as you attempt to score one of your own. Doon Valley is one of the most popular and affordable courses in southwestern Ontario.
Course detailsFour sets of tees ranging from 5,113 - 6,543 yards, Par 72.Course rating/slope for menBlack: 71.7./126Blue: 69.4/121White: 67.1/113Red: 64.8/102.Course rating/slope for womenRed: 69.8/116White: 72.5/125.
9-hole course
Players of all skill levels will enjoy this full-length 9-hole course. Doon Valley features some of the most scenic holes in Waterloo region. Those looking to enhance their game on an easy-to-walk course will not be disappointed.
Course detailsThree sets of tees ranging from 2,566 - 2,898 yards, Par 35.Course rating/slope for menBlue: 34.1/114White: 33.2/112Course rating/slope for womenRed: 34.3/114White: 35.6/122
Pitch & Putt
Whether you are new to the game or an experienced golfer wanting to improve your short game, Doon Valley's Pitch 'n Putt course is perfect for you. This 9-hole, short-yardage course features fewer hazards, making it ideal for children of all ages and those who want to try a simplified version of golf or practice iron accuracy. Daily rates and memberships are available.
Practice facility and driving range
Doon Valley's practice facility features a full-size driving range along with a large putting green with practice bunker. The driving range has flat, grass tees and excellent target greens at various distances. Being mostly surrounded by trees, the practice facility is a relaxing and peaceful atmosphere to practice your game. You can purchase a range basket at the pro shop.
The driving range is available on a first-come, first-served basis.
Clubhouse
Visit theclubhouseto find:
a full restaurant and barour pro shopchangerooms
Rentals
You can rent rooms at Doon Valley Golf Course for meetings or events. Tables and chairs are included in the room rental rate.Meeting Room – seating capacity 20 people – $123 half day or $202 full day, including HSTBanquet Room – seating capacity 120 people – $615 half day or $935 full day, including HSTDepending on the nature of your event other rental costs can include:Resound and SOCAN feesinsurancelicensingIf you're interested in booking this facility or getting a more detailed quote, pleasecomplete the inquiry formto tell us more about your event. Staff will confirm the details of your event with you before finalizing the booking.
Guidelines
Please follow these guidelines and rules when you're coming to a Kitchener Golf course:A valid credit card is required when making a booking. When a player fails to show up for a tee time, this negatively impacts the operation of the clubs and the experience of other players. A no show fee will be charged in the event that a player does not show up and does not contact the club to cancel at least 4 hours before a confirmed tee time (a “no show”). A no show fee in an amount equivalent to the green fee that would have applied to the round will be charged to either the no show player’s credit card or to the credit card on file for the player who booked the tee time for the no show player.Arrive to the course no later than 20 minutes before your tee-time.Pace of play is important to everyone. Be respectful of the other golfers and manage your pace of play appropriately.Replace your divots, rake the bunkers behind you and repair ball marks on the greens with either a ball mark tool or a tee.Every player must have their own bag and clubs. Rental clubs are available through the pro shop.Course closes at dark, please ensure all rental carts are returned before dark.Dress code: golfers must be properly attired at all times on premises, including the clubhouse.Men must wear shirts with sleeves.Ladies must wear clothing that covers their midriff.Cut-off shorts or jeans with holes are not permitted.Only Golf shoes or any other flat athletic shoes are permitted. Metal spikes or sport cleats are prohibited.To serve our customers better we ask that you provide both a phone number and email address on or prior to checking in for your round.No outside alcohol is permitted on the golf course property. We reserve the right to inspect all coolers and golf bags. Possession of alcohol, other than that purchased from this establishment, is against the law. You will be asked to surrender any unauthorized alcohol or to leave the premises.Single riders must pair up. Maximum two carts per group.To save time, you can check-in or pay for your round through our Kitchener Golf app.Each player will abide by and comply with the facility rules and guidelines (posted on scorecard and/or facility signs), as established and updated by the City from time to time, including but not limited to any rules and guidelines relating to public health.


Title: View our Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC) page
About the Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC)
In 2019, as a part of ourLeisure Facilities Master Plan,Kitchener city council approved the construction of a new indoor pool and indoor turf facility, which were identified as the top two recreation priorities based on community needs. The proposed Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC), to be built atRBJ Schlegel Park, will bring those needs, as well asother amenities, to our community.
Staff brought astaff reportandconsultants' reportto council outlining the target cost and design for the Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex which was unanimously supported by city council and ratified on April 8, 2024. Construction on the recreation complex will begin in May 2024, and the facility is scheduled to open in the summer of 2026.
Public engagement
From 2019 to 2022, we conducted substantial public and stakeholder engagement through interviews, workshops, feedback forms, focus groups and online surveys with sports groups and members of the public. All of the information collected helped identify community recreation priorities, which in turn informed the business case for the design and build of the Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC).
As things move forward with the construction of KIRC, there will be more public engagement opportunities focused on programming needs and some of the more detailed design options that the project team may require input on. This engagement is expected to be launched starting the summer/fall of 2024 and will continue for many months.
Subscribe to this page to get an email when engagement opportunities are available.
Project updates
We will share project updates below.
May 2024
On May 31, 2024, we hosted agroundbreaking eventto launch the start of construction of the new Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex atRBJ Schlegel Park. Construction of the facility started in June 2024, and is expected to open in the summer of 2026.
Check out the photo gallery of the groundbreaking event below.
Photo Gallery: KIRC groundbreaking event will appear here on the public site.
Amenities
The facility, which will become Kitchener’s premier indoor recreation destination, will include the following amenities, all of which are planned and designed to support a greater diversity of sports and physical activities in the community:
a FIFA-sized indoor turf fieldhouse divided into four individual fields that can be used for soccer, cricket, lacrosse and morean indoor pool area that includes both a leisure pool and a lane poolviewing galleries for the pool areaan indoor walking track around the perimeter of the indoor turf facilityan indoor cricket batting cagemultipurpose rooms for community events, parties and other rentals
The proposed designs for KIRC also include room for a gymnasium addition in the future.
The floor plan below shows the proposed facility, as well as the site for the future gymnasium.
Community benefits
Our proposal for KIRC is to create a facility that will serve as Kitchener’s premier recreation destination while also being an inclusive and welcoming space for all community members.
By design, KIRC will:
meet current and future recreation needs of the community: KIRC will provide much-needed pool and indoor turf programming space, with plans to expand the facility with an additional gym in the futuresupport the recreation needs of equity-deserving residents: KIRC will offer a greater diversity of recreation options to residents that are affordable and tailored to specific populationssupport recreation as a family experience:KIRC will prioritize the experience of parents and family members in the design of spectator and viewing areassupport the sustainability goals for a greener city: we will significantly reduce the carbon footprint of this facility by design and through operation
Sustainability
If approved, KIRC will be our first net-zero carbon building and one of the most sustainable recreation facilities in Canada.The KIRC project is pursuing certification under the Canada Green Building Council Zero Carbon Building Standard v3 – Design (ZCB – Design), which is the highest level of certification for zero carbon building standards in Canada.
The plans for KIRC include a geothermal heating and cooling system, as well as our largest array of solar panels. These features will reduce 22 tonnes of carbon annually and save us close to $100,000 in utility costs every year.
Visit ourcorporate sustainability pageto learn about our commitment to climate action.
Budget and finances
If approved by Council, the total budget for KIRC is $144 million. Construction of the new recreation facility will be funded through apreviously announced grantfrom the federal and provincial governments, as well as development charge revenues, meaning the construction of this facility will have no impact on municipal taxes.
In addition, theplanned sustainability featureswill save us close to $100,000 in utility costs every year.
Read thestaff reportandconsultants' reportfor more information.
Budget overview
ItemCostConstruction costs$124MContingencies$6.6MSoft costs/Owner costs$10.5MHST (1.76%)$2.5MTotal$144M
Costs have been rounded.
Photo and video renderings
See inside the proposed facility with these digital renderings:
turf fieldhouse – lower floorpoolphoto gallery
Turf fieldhouse – lower floor
Watch this video to see a rendering of the main entrance, lobby and lower floor of the turf fieldhouse:
Pool
Watch this video to see a rendering of 25m lane pool and leisure/programming pool:
Photo gallery
The photo gallery below includes renderings of the facility:
Photo Gallery: KIRC renderings will appear here on the public site.


Title: View our Parking page
Quick Links
Parking in KitchenerLearn about parking options in Kitchener, including paying for hourly parking from your phone.
Find a place to parkFind hourly or monthly parking downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for monthly parkingMonthly parking permits are available downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for hourly parkingYou can pay for hourly or daily parking from your phone or a kiosk.
Parking and non-parking ticketsPay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bike parkingPark your bike for free in one of our secure parking garages to keep it safe.
Overnight parking exemptionsRequest a parking exemption to park overnight between December 1 and March 31.
Parking bylawsOur parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
GuidesGuides related to parking in the City of Kitchener.
Parking in Kitchener
Learn about parking options in Kitchener, including paying for hourly parking from your phone.
Find a place to park
Find hourly or monthly parking downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for monthly parking
Monthly parking permits are available downtown and around Grand River Hospital.
Pay for hourly parking
You can pay for hourly or daily parking from your phone or a kiosk.
Parking and non-parking tickets
Pay or dispute a ticket. Learn about our appeal process.
Bike parking
Park your bike for free in one of our secure parking garages to keep it safe.
Overnight parking exemptions
Request a parking exemption to park overnight between December 1 and March 31.
Parking bylaws
Our parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Guides
Guides related to parking in the City of Kitchener.


Title: View our Snow removal page
Sidewalk shovelling
Property owners must clear the sidewalks around their property of both snow and ice within 24 hours of a snowfall. These sidewalks must be maintained to bare pavement on an ongoing basis. This includes clearing snow and ice on the sidewalk that prevents safe pedestrian access to the road, often found at corner lots (called awindrow).
If a complaint is received and a bylaw officer determines your sidewalk is not clear, you will have another 24 hours to clear it to our bare pavement standard. After this point, we may hire a contractor to clear your sidewalk and add the cost of the clearing to your property tax bill.
City sidewalks, trails, paths and bike lanes
We remove snow fromspecific sidewalks, trails, paths and bike lanes in Kitchener.
Windrows
A windrow is the snow left on the side of the road by a plow. At corner lots, snow from the road is sometimes moved onto the sidewalk after a plow, which prevents safe pedestrian access to the road. Please clear these areas of snow. Let's work together to make sure everyone has safe access to sidewalks and crosswalks.
Streets on city borders
We share 20 roads with the City of Waterloo. Our joint services program with Waterloo ensures that winter maintenance for these streets is effective and efficient.
Help with shovelling
These agencies offer paid snow removal to seniors or anyone who cannot clear their sidewalks:
Community Support Connections, 519-772-8787The Working Centre, 519-743-1151
You can also contact your local high school to see if there are students who need volunteer hours and can help you through the winter.
You may also qualify for ourassisted sidewalk and windrow clearing program.
Assisted sidewalk and windrow clearing
If you meet the criteria below, you may qualify for our assisted sidewalk and windrow clearing program:
Must be 65 years-old or older.ORHave a disability which prevents you from removing snow.ANDMust be a Kitchener resident.Reside in a single family, semi-detached or duplex dwelling unit and be owner or renter of such property.Have no person living in the same dwelling unit who is physically capable of removing snow.The total gross household income for all people living on the premises aged 18 or over must not exceed $46,000.Agree to a waiver of claims against the City with respect to any property or other damage which might arise out of the services being provided.
Applications for winter 2023/2024 are closed. We are now accepting applications for winter 2024/2025.
Apply online
Free sand for icy sidewalks
You can pick up free sand for use on sidewalks and walkways at sandboxes across the city. Please bring your own shovel and container to collect the sand.
Find free sand near you
Report snow or ice on sidewalks
You can report a sidewalk that has not been shovelledonlineor by phone at519-741-2345. When we get a complaint, we send staff out to inspect the sidewalk.
Overnight parking exemptions
Without an exemption, you cannot park overnight on city streets between December 1 and March 31, even when there is no snow. We consider overnight to be the time between 2:30 and 6 a.m.
Visit ourovernight parking exemptions pageto request an exemption.
Parking bylaw enforcement
During a snow event, you cannot park on city streets. Bylaw officers actively enforce this bylaw to prevent unplowed streets. We will ticket and possibly tow cars so plows can continue their work.
The ticket for parking on a city street during a snow event is $80.
If your car has been towed, call 519-741-2345 for its location.
Snow events
When there is snowfall of 8 cm or more happening or in the forecast in the weather forecast, we will declare a snow event. When we declare a snow event, you cannot park on city streets and we maytag and towyour car.
We try our best to give as much notice as possible before the declaration comes into effect, giving you time to move your car if it’s parked on a city street.
If the weather meets the criteria for both a snow event and asignificant weather event, we may declare both at the same time. This means that you will need to follow the guidelines and requirements of both declarations.
Declaring, extending or cancelling
If we declare a snow event, we will:
post on ourFacebookandX (formerly Twitter)accountssend a page subscription email for this webpage (subscribe by clicking the green subscribe button on this page)alert local mediaupdate ourGetting Around mapto show the roads that have been recently serviced
If we extend or cancel a snow event, we will:
post on ourFacebookandX (formerly Twitter)accountssend a page subscription email for this webpage (subscribe by clicking the green subscribe button on this page)
Significant weather events
We may declare a significant weather event when the weather forecast or actual weather conditions have the potential to pose a significant danger to residents travelling within or around the city.
This can include any of the following:
over 20 cm of snow accumulation expected or happening during a 24-hour periodover 20 cm of ice accretion from a freezing rain event lasting longer than 12 hourssustained winds above 60 km/h
If we declare a significant weather event, you should:
limit unnecessary traveluse extra caution when travelling outdoors
A significant weather event does not include a street parking ban beyond any restrictions in the bylaw, so parking on city streets is still allowed unless a snow event is also active.
If the weather meets the criteria for both a significant weather event andsnow event, we may declare both at the same time. This means you will need to follow the guidelines and requirements of both declarations.
If we declare a significant weather event, we will:
post on ourFacebookandX (formerly Twitter)accountssend a page subscription email for this webpage (subscribe by clicking the green subscribe button on this page)alert local media
Snow loading
When there is significant snow accumulation from plowing roads, bike lanes and ION tracks, city crews pull snow out from the edge of the road and boulevards onto the road and load it into dump trucks. Then, they move the snow to our snow storage and disposal facility.
While snow loading is happening near you, you may hear large machinery and see flashing lights.
Snow plow routes
It takes between 16 and 24 hours to plow all routes after the snow has stopped falling. We assign each snow plow a specific route of the city and priority for plowing.
Other factors, such as temperatures, future forecasts and precipitation, determine how and when plowing, salting or sanding should take place.
View our snow plow priorities map
Priority 1
Main roads and major arteries. All priority 1 routes and all GRT bus routes are maintained until complete.
Priority 2
Hills, curves and GRT bus routes. Work on priority 2 streets begins only after priority 1 streets have been completed. If snow resumes while in priority 1 or 2, then clearing priority 1 roads is restarted.
Priority 3
Balance of backstreets, completing a full plow of the city. Work on priority 3 routes starts only after priorities 1 and 2 have been completed. If snow resumes while in priority 1 or 2, then clearing priority 1 roads is restarted.
City sidewalks
We remove snow and ice from specific sidewalks and walkways around the city, including:
sidewalks that surround city-owned property, such as community centressidewalks within the downtown core, in connection with the Downtown Kitchener BIA‘back lot’ sidewalks: sidewalks that run along the back fence of properties that owners do not have to maintain under the bylawwalkways between neighbourhoodscrossing guard locationssome crosswalks
We do not remove snow or ice from sidewalks not listed above.
Trails and paths
We do not remove snow from trails or parking lots that do not have a concrete or asphalt surface. This is to avoid damage. Applying salt can harm these areas.
Multi-use trails
Multi-use trails are our network of trails, some of which run along city streets. Many run through our parks and open spaces. These hard-surface trails offer year-round use for pedestrians and cyclists. We maintain many trails during the winter, but not all.
Multi-use paths
Multi-use paths connect pedestrians to the regional road network, providing an asphalt surface for pedestrians, cyclists and more. We maintain these pathways during the winter in partnership with the Region of Waterloo. The region is responsible for repairs, brush cutting and grass cutting.
Bike lanes
We clear all bike lanes within 24 hours after a snowfall.


Title: View our Book an appointment page
City Hall
The address of City Hall is:
200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4G7
The building is open during these hours:
Monday to Friday: 7 a.m. to 9 p.m.weekends and statutory holidays: 9 a.m. to 9 p.m.
City Hall is open for in-person services from Monday to Friday between 8:30 a.m. and 5 p.m.at our main floor City Hall Service Centre. Staff from all City Hall service areas are available to serve you from one central, accessible location.
When you arrive at City Hall, staff will be available to check you in for your appointment or service request or check in at one of our convenient self-serve kiosks.
Multi-language and American Sign Language (ASL) interpretation supportis available in person at City Hall.
Revenue
Appointments are available, but not required to make these payments in person:
property taxesutility billsparking tickets
Book an appointment
Payment methods
We accept these payment methods.
debit cardcashcheque made out to the City of Kitchener
We do not accept payment by credit card.
Other payments
Please call 519-741-2450 orsend us an email.
Marriage licensing
City Hallis open for walk-ins to apply for a marriage licence. If you want to plan your visit, you canbook an appointment.
Visit ourmarriage and divorce pageto find:
what you need to get a marriage licencelicence costlicence requirements
Building
You canbook an appointment onlinefor any of these building services:
deliver plans or reportsrequest surveys or drawingsmake a paymentgrading or building complaintsapply for a building permit
Engineering
You canbook an appointment onlinefor any of these engineering services:
make a paymentdeliver plans or reportsdrainage complaintsapply for a permitreview site plans or subdivisions
Legislated services
You canbook an appointment onlineto:
apply for a marriage licenceapply for or renew a business licencecommission documents, including French foreign pension documents (see available list)make a freedom of information (FOI) requestapply for or learn about lottery licences
Parking
If you need to pick up a new parking transponder or permit, you canbook an appointment online.
Planning
You canbook an appointment onlinefor any of these planning services:
make a paymentpick up or drop off notice signsdevelopment application affidavit - commissioner signatureconsultation for development applications and services


Title: Smoke and CO alarm safety
Smoke alarms
Every home must have working smoke alarms on every level and outside sleeping areas. It is the law!
Smoke alarms provide early warning and time to leave when there's a fire. A large portion of fire deaths in the home happen at night, while sleeping.
Installation and maintenance
Since smoke rises, install smoke alarms on the ceiling or high on the wall. Avoid placing them close to bathrooms, heating appliances, windows or fans. For more protection, install alarms inside bedrooms.
Homeowners must install and maintain smoke alarms on every level of the home and outside sleeping areas. Landlords must also comply with the same law as homeowners, installing and maintaining smoke alarms for their tenants. Tenants must contact their landlord if they do not have the required smoke alarms. It is against the law for a tenant to tamper with a smoke alarm.
Smoke alarm safety checklist
Stay safe by following our smoke alarm safety checklist:
test your smoke alarms monthlyif your smoke alarm has removable batteries, change them twice per year (daylight savings time)gently vacuum your smoke alarm once a month with soft brushreplace smoke alarm when they exceed the recommended life cycle (usually 10 years)replace an alarm earlier if it is not working correctly or damaged
Learn more aboutsmoke alarm safety.
Types of smoke alarms
There are several types of smoke alarms. Electricity or battery, or a mix of both can power alarms. Many alarms have a pause feature, which you can use to silence an alarm for a brief period.
Smoke alarms with high decibel alarms or strobe lights are available for the hearing impaired. Visit theCanadian Hearing Societyfor more information.
Carbon monoxide (CO) alarms
As of April 2015, it's the law to install carbon monoxide (CO) alarms next to all sleeping areas if your home has:
a fuel-burning appliancea fireplacean attached garage
Quick facts about carbon monoxide
Here are some quick facts about CO:
CO is a colourless, tasteless and odourless gasfuels that do not have enough air to burn completely produce CO gasany device that burns fuels can produce CO gas, including stoves, fireplaces, generators and enginesexposure to CO gas can cause flu symptomsat high levels, CO gas can cause loss of consciousness or death
Learn more aboutcarbon monoxide prevention.


Title: View our Understanding city planning page
Quick Links
Neighbourhood development guideRegulations, city processes and permits, build approvals and public involvement.
Current planning applicationsMap with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Walking toursWalk, explore and experience Kitchener's rich history, culture and diversity.
Land development applicationsLinks to development resources to help with your project.
Land use planning and development videosLearn how our community grows through planning and development.
Building and renovatingBuilding permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.
Neighbourhood development guide
Regulations, city processes and permits, build approvals and public involvement.
Current planning applications
Map with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Walking tours
Walk, explore and experience Kitchener's rich history, culture and diversity.
Land development applications
Links to development resources to help with your project.
Land use planning and development videos
Learn how our community grows through planning and development.
Building and renovating
Building permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.


Title: View our Fire permits and inspections page
Fire permits
You need to get a fire permit for open air burning, event fireworks and pyrotechnics.
You do not need a permit for recreational fires, but you must follow ourbackyard fire bylaws.
Open air burning
If you live in the rural areas of Kitchener and want to burn waste material for non-recreational purposes, you need a permit.
With an open-air burn permit, you can have a fire on your property to clean up excess yard waste such as fallen trees or to clear farmland. Brush and branches may qualify, but we encourage you to mulch that type of debris and drop it off at the regional landfill.
Open-air burning is only allowed in areas that have been designated as rural. You must arrange a visual inspection of the burn area with our fire department to confirm the location fits within the rules.
Permit rules
tell Kitchener Fire Dispatch before burning starts and when burning is completeburn only during daylight hoursdo not burn during weather conditions that pose a fire risk like high wind or a lack of raindo not burn if dry grass is in the immediate areasynthetic material like plastics and rubber cannot be burneddo not burn if there is an air quality advisory
Fireworks and pyrotechnic events
You can set off fireworks before 11 p.m. on these days:
Victoria DayCanada DayDiwali
If you want to set off fireworks on any other days, you need to apply for a permit.
You cannot set off fireworks on public property. Visit ourbylaws at home pageto find fireworks safety tips.
Fire inspections
If you own a building, you must ensure it complies with theOntario Fire Code, preventing injuries and protecting your property. We can help you understand the code and inspect your property for compliance.
When you need a fire inspection
Part six of the Ontario Fire Code addresses fire protection equipment. It outlines when you need a fire inspection. Some specific examples are outlined below.
If you need a business licence, you must also request a fire inspection.
If you’re getting a temporary or permanent licence from the Alcohol and Gambling Commission of Ontario, you need a fire inspection. There is an exception for situations where the owner provides detailed dimensioned drawings outlining the use of the space.
What fire inspections involve
Our fire inspectors will look at:
paths available to leave a buildingconstructionhow a building is dividedinterior finishbuilding servicesfire protection systemsfire alarm and detection systems
File searches
If you’re selling, buying, insuring or re-mortgaging a property, you should check if there are any outstanding orders against the property. Typically, law firms or financial institutions complete these searches. You can also request a search of a property.
We will supply a file search for any outstanding Ontario Fire Code violations against a property. To request a file search of a property that you do not own we need written authorization from the current owner giving us permission to conduct the search.
Request a permit, inspection or file search
To request a fire permit, inspection or file search:
call 519-741-2495send us an email


Title: Your home and property
Quick Links
Property standardsAll property owners must follow our standards for maintenance and occupancy.
Encroachment issuesHelp us protect our city by not encroaching on city property.
TermitesOur termite bylaw and information about termite environments.
Property standards
All property owners must follow our standards for maintenance and occupancy.
Encroachment issues
Help us protect our city by not encroaching on city property.
Termites
Our termite bylaw and information about termite environments.


Title: View our Victoria Park planning review page
About the review
The Victoria Park neighbourhood planning review includes:
existing Victoria Park secondary plan areapart of the Victoria Street secondary plan areapart of the Mill Courtland Woodside Park secondary plan area
This new area is proposed to become the new Victoria Park Secondary Plan
We shared the following changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Appendix Document
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
Existing Land Use MapExisting Zoning MapExisting Zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)
Proposed secondary plan policies and land use
Proposed Secondary Plan PoliciesProposed Applicable Official Plan PoliciesProposed Land Use(Map 13)Land Use TypologiesProposed Revised Urban Structure(Map 2)Proposed Revised Cultural Heritage Resources(Map 9a)Proposed Integrated Transportation System(Map 11)
Proposed zoning
Proposed Zoning(Map)Zoning TypologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and StackingMap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions(specific to properties within Neighbourhood Planning Reviews)
Urban design guidelines
City of Kitchener Urban Design Manual - Residential Infill in Central Neighbourhoods
Previous community engagement
We held an open house to get feedback from the community on December 4, 2018. Use the link below to find information we presented at the open house:
Notice of Open House


Title: View our Fire and carbon monoxide alarms page
Smoke alarms
Every home must have working smoke alarms on every level and outside sleeping areas. It is the law!
Smoke alarms provide early warning and time to leave when there's a fire. A large portion of fire deaths in the home happen at night, while sleeping.
Installation and maintenance
Since smoke rises, install smoke alarms on the ceiling or high on the wall. Avoid placing them close to bathrooms, heating appliances, windows or fans. For more protection, install alarms inside bedrooms.
Homeowners must install and maintain smoke alarms on every level of the home and outside sleeping areas. Landlords must also comply with the same law as homeowners, installing and maintaining smoke alarms for their tenants. Tenants must contact their landlord if they do not have the required smoke alarms. It is against the law for a tenant to tamper with a smoke alarm.
Smoke alarm safety checklist
Stay safe by following our smoke alarm safety checklist:
test your smoke alarms monthlyif your smoke alarm has removable batteries, change them twice per year (daylight savings time)gently vacuum your smoke alarm once a month with soft brushreplace smoke alarm when they exceed the recommended life cycle (usually 10 years)replace an alarm earlier if it is not working correctly or damaged
Learn more aboutsmoke alarm safety.
Types of smoke alarms
There are several types of smoke alarms. Electricity or battery, or a mix of both can power alarms. Many alarms have a pause feature, which you can use to silence an alarm for a brief period.
Smoke alarms with high decibel alarms or strobe lights are available for the hearing impaired. Visit theCanadian Hearing Societyfor more information.
Carbon monoxide (CO) alarms
As of April 2015, it's the law to install carbon monoxide (CO) alarms next to all sleeping areas if your home has:
a fuel-burning appliancea fireplacean attached garage
Quick facts about carbon monoxide
Here are some quick facts about CO:
CO is a colourless, tasteless and odourless gasfuels that do not have enough air to burn completely produce CO gasany device that burns fuels can produce CO gas, including stoves, fireplaces, generators and enginesexposure to CO gas can cause flu symptomsat high levels, CO gas can cause loss of consciousness or death
Learn more aboutcarbon monoxide prevention.


Title: View our Development and construction page
Quick Links
Official PlanObjectives and policies to help coordinate our future planning and development.
ZoningZoning information, including our zoning bylaw and review.
Site plansYou may need to submit a site plan application, depending on your project.
Community plansOur community plans help guide the development of large areas.
Building permitsEverything you need to know about getting a building permit in Kitchener.
EngineeringEngineering permits and information to help with your project.
Current planning applicationsMap with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
ConstructionNew and restorative structure and infrastructure construction work information.
Heritage permits and guidelinesApply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Urban designArchitecture, landscape and planning practices used to design Kitchener spaces.
Fire safetyFire safety resources for your development.
Understanding city planningLearn about land use planning in Kitchener.
Resources for builders and developersList of resources and information on City of Kitchener development requirements.
Official Plan
Objectives and policies to help coordinate our future planning and development.
Zoning
Zoning information, including our zoning bylaw and review.
Site plans
You may need to submit a site plan application, depending on your project.
Community plans
Our community plans help guide the development of large areas.
Building permits
Everything you need to know about getting a building permit in Kitchener.
Engineering
Engineering permits and information to help with your project.
Current planning applications
Map with information about upcoming and past development proposals.
Construction
New and restorative structure and infrastructure construction work information.
Heritage permits and guidelines
Apply for a heritage permit or learn about our heritage building guidelines.
Urban design
Architecture, landscape and planning practices used to design Kitchener spaces.
Fire safety
Fire safety resources for your development.
Understanding city planning
Learn about land use planning in Kitchener.
Resources for builders and developers
List of resources and information on City of Kitchener development requirements.


Title: View our Building and industry updates page
Building bulletins
2024 bulletins
BB 24-01: Composite and Alternative Decking and Guard MaterialsBB 24-02: Building Permits for Emergency Plumbing RepairsBB 24-03: Inspection Notice for Monday, April 8BB 24-04: Online Service Portal is Now Live for All PermitsBB 24-05: Limited Inspections June 26BB 24-06: 2024 Ontario Building Code Change Highlights
2023 bulletins
BB 23-01: Composite and Alternative Decking and Guard MaterialsBB 23-02: Online PaymentsBB 23-03: Demountable Stages and Demountable Support StructuresBB 23-04: Inspection NoticeBB 23-05: Fibreglass RebarBB 23-06: Laminated Finger-Jointed Lumber (LFL)BB 23-07: Permit Fee Payment Change for All Part 9 Building Applications
2022 bulletins
BB 22-01: Model Home OccupancyBB 22-02: Water Closet Hand-Held Bidet Sprayer and Premise Isolation BackflowBB 22-03: Interim Amendments to the OBCBB 22-04: Fire Separations & Horizontal Shaft Wall update- VOIDBB 22-05: Development Charges, Permit Fees and Annual Industry Workshop
2021 bulletins
BB 21-01: Determination of Grade - Group E Restaurants and Group C Care Facilities
Annual workshop presentations
Every year our building team hosts an annual workshop for home builders, designers and contractors. These workshops let the industry know about recent or upcoming changes to the Ontario Building Code, changes to application requirements and standard procedures.
The presentation material from recent annual workshops are below. Pleasecontact usif you have any questions.
2023 Industry Workshop2022 Industry Workshop2021 Industry Workshopvideo presentationPowerPoint presentationquestions and answers2019 Industry Workshop


Title: View our ICI building permits page
Application process
Visit ourapply for a building permit pageto find:
how to apply for a permitprocessing timesdrawing requirementspermit feeswhat happens when we issue your permitinformation about inspections
All projects must follow ourzoning bylaws.
If you're looking for a building permit for your home, visit ourresidential building permits page.
Miscellaneous permits and applications
Visit ourmiscellaneous permits and applications pageto find requirements for these applications:
adding solar panelsadding a backflow deviceinstalling or altering a septic systememergency water service repairtentsdemountable stages and support structuresoutdoor patios
Demolition permit
You need a building permit for a partial or full demolition of a building.
Use the accordions below to find the requirements to apply for this building permit.
Feedemolition fee: $0.03 per square foot (minimum $163) plus rebate feerebate fee: $1,000Permit and rebate fees are due when the permit is submitted. We must receive the fees in order to start the permit review timeline and process. See ourfee scheduleorsend us an emailfor help with the fee calculations. If a code review is required for determining the permit fees, the rebate fee is still required at the time of permit submission.Application requirementsapplication formpre- and post- grading plans, prepared by a professional engineer or Ontario land surveyordemolition tracking sheetswith all sign offs completedcompleteddemolition agreement formIf you’re demolishing a builder larger than 600 square meters:professional engineer’s report that includes the descriptions of the structural design characteristics of the building(s) and the method of demolition (OBC Div. C, 1.3.1.1(3))Commitment to General Review formfrom the engineer who is overseeing the demolition and completing the general reviewDemolition controlIf the building is residential or includes any residential units, you need to apply fordemolition control.
New building or addition (ICI and part 3 - residential)
You need a building permit for new ICI buildings or additions.
Feessee ourfee schedulefor permit fees and other chargesrebate fee: $10 per $1,000 of the total construction value (maximum $5,000)Permit and rebate fees are due when the permit is submitted. We must receive the fees in order to start the permit review timeline and process. See ourfee scheduleorsend us an emailfor help with the fee calculations. If a code review is required for determining the permit fees, the rebate fee is still required at the time of permit submission.Application requirementsapplication formstamped building code matrixcommitment to general review form(architect and/or professional engineer)schedule 1 form(BCIN designer)stamped geotechnical soil reportflow control roof drainage declaration form(if required)required plans (next accordion)energy efficiency certification form(last accordion)SB-10 formif you choose an energy efficient designdevelopment charges information sheetRequired plansStamped by an architect:site planStamped by an OLS, CET or professional engineer:grading and erosion control planStamped by an architect or professional engineer, complete with stamps, signatures and dates:architectural (only signature)structuralmechanicalelectricalsite servicing plans (including approved city copy)Energy efficiency certificationchoose the energy efficiency design for the building or choose the reason for exemptionfor all methods, get all seals and signatures (architect, mechanical and electrical engineer)if you choose an energy efficiency design, complete theSB-10 form
Interior alteration
You need a building permit for interior alterations to ICI buildings.
Feespermit fee: $0.37 per square footrebate fee: $1,000Permit and rebate fees are due when the permit is submitted. We must receive the fees in order to start the permit review timeline and process. See ourfee scheduleorsend us an emailfor help with the fee calculations. If a code review is required for determining the permit fees, the rebate fee is still required at the time of permit submission.Application requirementsapplication formstamped building code matrixorPart 11 code matrix(for change of use)commitment to general review form(architect and/or engineer)schedule 1 form(BCIN designer)key plan showing existing units within a plaza or location of work within a single buildingrequired stamped plans (next accordion)Required plansStamped by an architect, professional engineer or qualified designerarchitecturalStamped by a professional engineer or qualified designerplumbingHVACelectrical


Title: View our Mayoral decisions page
About mayoral powers and duties
The mayor has special powers and duties under part VI.1 of theMunicipal Act, 2001. These include powers to:
bring matters to city council that advance certain provincial priorities and veto any by-laws passed by council that may interfere with the advancement of those priorities.create committees of city council, assign their functions and appoint the chairs and vice chairs of committees of council.propose the city's budget subject to council amendments, a mayoral veto and a council override process.appoint and dismiss the chief administrative officer as well as various leadership positions.direct city staff in writing for certain purposes.
There are certain powers and duties the Mayor may choose to delegate.
The mayor is required to exercise the powers in writing and make them available to the public, subject to theMunicipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act.
Decisions and directions
Finddecisionsanddirectionson LaserFiche.


Title: View our MyKitchener page
About MyKitchener
MyKitchener is our new online experience for anyone who lives, works or plays in Kitchener!
On MyKitchener, you can create an account to access our new self-serve portal and personalize your online experience with the city. Build your personal dashboard and add widgets like:
programs and activities: find programs that match your interestspools and swimming: find your local pool and single-visit swim programsreport a problem: send us a bylaw request or let us know if something is wronghospital wait times: check the wait times at Kitchener hospitalsparking tickets: pay your parking ticket online
You do not need to sign up for a MyKitchener account to use our website.
Sign up for a MyKitchener account
Ready to get started? All you need is an email address and secure password. You can also sign up using your favourite social media account.
Tell us what you think
We want to hear from you! On your MyKitchener dashboard, you’ll see a space where you can tell us what you think. Use the “Get Feedback” button the right side of the screen to tell us what you think.
Support
Check oursupport centrefor answers to your questions and tutorials.


Title: View our Victoria Street page
About the review
The Victoria Street neighbourhood planning review includes the area of the Victoria Street secondary plan.
We are proposing that:
part of the Victoria Street secondary plan becomes part of the Victoria Park secondary planthe rest of the Victoria Street secondary plan becomes part of the city’s official plan
We shared the following changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Summary of Comment Submissions and Staff Responses
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
Existing Land Use MapExisting Zoning MapExisting Zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)
Proposed secondary plan policies and land use
Proposed Secondary Plan PoliciesProposed Applicable Official Plan PoliciesProposed Land UseLand Use TypologiesProposed Revised Urban Structure(Map 2)Proposed Revised Cultural Heritage Resources(Map 9a)Proposed Integrated Transportation System(Map 11)
Proposed zoning
Proposed Zoning(Map)Zoning TypologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and StackingMap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions(specific to properties within Neighbourhood Planning Reviews)
Urban design guidelines
City of Kitchener Urban Design Manual - Residential Infill in Central Neighbourhoods


Title: View our Bylaws (municipal code) page



Title: Engineering
Quick Links
Site alterationOur site alteration bylaw controls certain kinds of changes to a property.
Site certificationFor projects with a site plan, we check that it has been implemented properly.
Off-site worksGet a permit to do construction work on a city or regional right of way.
Driveway wideningGet a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.
Site alteration
Our site alteration bylaw controls certain kinds of changes to a property.
Site certification
For projects with a site plan, we check that it has been implemented properly.
Off-site works
Get a permit to do construction work on a city or regional right of way.
Driveway widening
Get a permit to widen your driveway on a city or regional road.


Title: View our Building standards page
Our standards
Our building permit and approval processes ensures your project meets ourbuilding bylawand theOntario Building Code.
Our requirements apply to industrial, commercial, institutional and multi-residential buildings:
constructionalterationschange of use
Ontario Building Code
The Ontario Building Code Act sets out detailed technical and administrative requirements as well as minimum standards. The Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing produces and distributes the Code.
You can get a copy:
for free onlinefrom theKitchener Public Librarymain branchthroughPublications Ontario(price varies)
Building permit reports and statistics
Building permit information is available in ouropen data catalogue. New data sets will be added as they become available.
Yearly subscriptions to our monthly building permit reports are also available for purchase.
If you have any questions, call us at 519-741-2312 orsend us an email.
Our revenue and expenses
The Ontario Building Code Act requires us to share an annual report on our collection of fees and our costs to administer and enforce the act. For earlier reports, pleasecontact us.
2021annual building reportreserve fund statement2020annual building report2019annual building reportreserve fund statement


Title: Social services
Quick Links
Cooling centresPlaces to cool down during the summer across the Region of Waterloo.
Warming centresPlaces to warm up during the winter across the Region of Waterloo
Kitchener Housing Inc.Our non-profit housing corporation specializes in affordable housing.
EncampmentsWith increased homelessness, there are more encampments in public places within the city.
Region of Waterloo community servicesServices offered by the Region of Waterloo, including child care and housing.
Cooling centres
Places to cool down during the summer across the Region of Waterloo.
Warming centres
Places to warm up during the winter across the Region of Waterloo
Kitchener Housing Inc.
Our non-profit housing corporation specializes in affordable housing.
Encampments
With increased homelessness, there are more encampments in public places within the city.
Region of Waterloo community services
Services offered by the Region of Waterloo, including child care and housing.


Title: View our Tax and utility e-billing page
Book an appointment
City Hall is open for in-person services. If you want to plan your visit and reduce waiting times, pleasebook an appointment.Many services are also available online or by phone.
Why sign up for e-billing?
With our e-billing service, you can:
view your tax and utility bills onlinepay your bill directly through the portaltrack utility consumptionaccess your account 24-7download and print your billsrequest customer service supporthave someone manage your account on your behalf
Register for e-billing
Have your most recent City of Kitchener property tax or Kitchener Utilities bill ready. You will need your bill ID, found in the top right corner of your bill, and your bill issue date.
Register for or sign into e-billing
Tax and utility e-billing terms of useAgreement to Terms of UseBy using the site, you agree to these terms of use; if you do not agree, do not use the site.These terms of use affect your legal rights and responsibilities and create a legally binding contract between you and the City.The City reserves the right, in its sole discretion, to change these Terms of Use at any time. It is your responsibility to check these Terms of Use regularly for changes, and you agree to do so. Your continued use of the Site following the posting of changes (or the amended Terms of Use incorporating those changes) will mean that you accept and agree to the changes. As long as you comply with these Terms of Use, the City grants you a personal, non-exclusive, non-transferable, non-sublicensable, revocable, limited licence to enter and use the Site.You may use the Site only for your own use as an end-user. You may not sell, lease, or otherwise transfer use of or access to the Site to anyone else.If you are using the Site on behalf of a business or corporation, the business or the corporation accepts these Terms of Use, and you:acknowledge that you have the authority to bind the business or corporation; andagree to these Terms of Use on behalf of the business or corporation.You consent to receiving certain communications from us as described in these Terms of Use. You consent to receive those communications from us electronically to your email address using the contact information you have provided to us. We may also communicate with you by posting notices on the Site. You agree that all agreements, notices, disclosures, and other communications that we provide to you electronically by any method described above, or any combination of those methods, satisfy any requirement to communicate with you under these Terms of Use and any legal requirement that such communications be in writing.  You hereby direct the City to send Your property tax bill to Your email address rather than mailing it directly to you at your residence, place of business, or the premises in respect of which the taxes are payable in accordance with section 343(6) of theMunicipal Act, 2001.You also agree that you will keep your contact information up to date and notify us immediately if your contact information changes. To update your contact information, you must sign into your account on the Site and follow the appropriate steps.You will comply with the laws of Canada and with any applicable laws of the Province of Ontario. You will not do or attempt to do the following:conduct any illegal or improper activities.harass any other party or other parties.disrupt, undermine, corrupt, threaten or bring into disrepute the Site.When you provide personal information or other information to us it will be true and accurate. Without limiting that requirement, you will not pretend to be or represent someone else, or otherwise impersonate any other individual or entity.You will not use any "page-scrape" or automatic device, program, or any equivalent or similar manual process, toaccess, acquire, copy, or monitor any portion of the Site or any content.reproduce or circumvent the navigational structure or presentation of the Site.obtain or attempt to obtain any content or other data or information through any means that we have not purposely and expressly made available for that purpose on the Site.You will not attempt to gain unauthorized access to any portion or feature of the Site by hacking, password "mining" or any other illegitimate means.You will not:probe, scan, or test the vulnerability of the Site.breach or bypass the security or authentication measures on the Site.reverse look-up or trace any information on any party to its source.exploit the Site or any service or information made available or offered by or through the Site to reveal any information not expressly provided on the Site, including personal identification of other individuals or information regarding other commercial customers.You will not upload a program or application or take any other action that imposes an unreasonable or disproportionately large load on the infrastructure of the Site.You authorize us to accept, without any further verification, and you agree to be responsible for, all activities with respect to your account when conducted using your username and password and/or other authentication information. The use of your username, password, and/or other authentication information by you, or by any person with or without your knowledge or consent, is legally binding and makes you responsible to the same extent and effect as if you had given signed, written authorization to us. You are entirely responsible for maintaining the confidentiality of the information you hold for your account, including any authentication information.You agree to notify the City immediately of any unauthorized use of your account or any other breach of security of which you become aware. The City may suspend your account for security or administrative reasons, but you will be responsible for all activity connected to your account before that revocation takes effect.You will not use anyone else's account at any time except as expressly permitted by applicable Canadian law, for example under a power of attorney for property or in your capacity of administrator for the account holder's estate.We have taken considerable care to prepare and maintain the Site and the content. However, we are providing the site and its contents strictly on an "as is" and "as available" basis.Your use of the Site is at your sole risk. Except as may be expressly provided for in these Terms of Use, your sole remedy against the City with respect to your use of the Site is to stop using the Site. To the fullest extent permissible pursuant to applicable Canadian law, with respect to the Site and content, the City disclaims all warranties, expressed or implied, including implied warranties of accuracy, merchantability, and fitness for a particular purpose. Without limiting the generality of the foregoing, The City will not be liable for any damages caused to computer systems, software, or electronic files by computer viruses, "worms", "trojan horses" or other items or forces of an intrusive, disruptive, or destructive nature.The City reserves the right to do any of the following, at any time, without notice:to modify, suspend or terminate operation of or access to the Site, or any portion of the Site, for any reason.to modify or change the Site, or any portion of the Site, and any applicable policies or terms; andto interrupt the operation of the Site, or any portion of the Site, as necessary to perform routine or non-routine maintenance, error correction, or other changes.Without limiting any of the foregoing, and notwithstanding anything else in these Terms of Use, or any other communication or document, the City will not be responsible for any direct, indirect, special, incidental, or consequential damages or any other damages whatsoever, even if the City is expressly advised of the possibility of such damages, arising out of or in connection with the site, any content, communications to and from the City, or any software, information or documents contained in or accessed via the site, including any loss of use, lost data, lost business profits, business interruption, property damage, personal injury or any other loss, whether the action is In contract, tort (including negligence and/or gross negligence) or otherwise.Such limitation of liability applies whether the damages arise from the use or misuse of and reliance on the site, inability to use the site, or from the interruption, suspension, or termination of the site (including such damages incurred by third parties).This limitation of liability shall also apply with respect to unauthorized access to or alteration of your transmissions or data.This limitation of liability shall apply to the fullest extent permitted by law.Without limiting the foregoing, the City will not be liable for any:delay or failure in performance resulting directly or indirectly from acts of nature, forces or causes beyond their reasonable control, including internet failures, computer equipment failures, telecommunication equipment failures, other equipment failures, electrical power failures, strikes, labor disputes, riots, insurrections, civil disturbances, shortages of labor or materials, fires, floods, storms, explosions, acts of God, war, governmental actions, orders of domestic or foreign courts or tribunals, non-performance of third parties, or loss of or fluctuations in heat, light, or air conditioning;delay, damage, loss or inconvenience to you or any other person that may incur in the event of unauthorized access to your account or your personal information as a result of your failing to keep your account information secure and confidential.To the maximum extent permitted by applicable law, you will defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the City from and against all claims, demands, losses, fines, expenses (including all legal fees and costs), or any other type of liability (collectively, "Claims") arising out of:your breach of these Terms of Use, oryour use of the Site.In our sole discretion and without prior notice, we may terminate your access to the Site and/or block your future access to the Site if we determine that you have breached these Terms of Use or other agreements or guidelines that may be associated with your use of the Site.We may also, in our sole discretion and without prior notice, terminate your access to the Site in any other circumstances where we determine this to be appropriate and/or necessary, including:requests by law enforcement or other government agencies.a request by you to cancel your account.discontinuance or material modification of the Site; orunexpected technical issues or problems.These Terms of Use and all disputes or other matters arising out of your use of the Site will be governed by the laws of the Province of Ontario and the applicable laws of Canada, without regard to conflict of law principles, and will be dealt with solely by a court of competent jurisdiction in Ontario, Canada.Privacy policyTheCity’s Privacy Statementapplies to the use of the Site. The Privacy Statement is incorporated into and forms part of these Terms of Use. You acknowledge and agree that Internet transmissions are never completely private or secure. You understand that despite any security measures that the City may have in place, it is possible that unauthorized parties might intercept any message or information you send or receive within, to, or from the Site.


Title: View our Affordable housing incentives page
About affordable housing incentives
We have two types of affordable housing incentives:
not-for-profit affordable rental and co-op housing incentive (pilot)affordable rental housing fee waiver
If you're not sure where to start or have any questions,send us an email. We can assign your project to a project manager who will help you navigate the approvals process and meet your project timelines.
Not-for-profit affordable rental and co-op housing incentive (pilot)
This program will provide a grant for $10,000 per unit (up to a max of 50 units per project) for not-for-profit affordable rental or co-op housing units. The grant can cover non-capital upfront costs relating to site design and development approvals to help advance projects from an idea to being shovel ready.
Eligible projects would need to secure building permits by September 1, 2026.
Eligibility
Eligible projects will meet the following criteria:
projects will be subject to financial review =to confirm project viabilityapplicant must be a non-profit housing developerincentives only apply to the creation of new affordable dwelling units, as outlined in thepolicyeligible projects are those that are in the early stages of ideation or concept development through building permit review (projects with a building permit issued for the proposed new units are not eligible)proof of ownership or legal right to develop on lands
Eligible expenses include:
analysis of need and demand for the proposed projectproject viability assessment plan/analysis -pro formapreliminary financial feasibilitybusiness plansproperty appraisalland surveysplanning analysis and studiesproject drawings and specifications (conceptual to detailed design)environmental site assessmentsgeotechnical surveys (e.g., soil load bearing tests)energy modellingaccessibility modelling studies (cost-benefit analysis)engineering studies (e.g., wind, shadow, and transportation analyses)construction cost estimatesQuantity Surveyorcontract documentslegal fees associated with land developmentinterior design consultant servicesother plans or studies, as required through a Planning Act application or building permitmunicipal, development permit and other government agency fees not covered by our affordable rental housing fee waiver programother items not on this list subject to City of Kitchener approval
Apply
Download theapplication formandemail to our planning teamtogether with digital copies of the required supporting information as outlined on the application form.
If your application is larger than 10 MB, please contact us to arrange for a file transfer.
Information session
We're hosting a virtual information session for interested applicants on Wednesday, June 19, from 2 to 3 p.m. Pleasesend us an emailto RSVP. We'll send you a meeting invitation and meeting link after you RSVP.
Affordable rental housing fee waiver
If your non-profit corporation is planning an eligible affordable rental housing development in Kitchener, you can request exemption from:
development application feesbuilding permit fees
proponents must be a non-profit corporationminimum of 20 percent of residential units must be set at or below 80% ofaverage market rent in the regionprojects must be within 450 metres of transit corridors across Kitchener (seeeligibility area map)
Download theapplication formandemail it to our planning teamtogether with digital copies of the required supporting information as outlined on the application form.
If your application is larger than 10 MB, please contact us to arrange for a file transfer.
Resources
To learn more about our affordable housing policies, reference these policies:
Not-For-Profit Affordable Rental & Co-op Housing IncentiveDevelopment Application Fees and Building Permit Fees for Affordable Rental Housing
The Region of Waterloo is the service manager for housing in our area. Learn more aboutregional services and programs.
We developed ahousing strategyaimed at addressing challenges to housing affordability in Kitchener across the housing continuum.
Get information about city permits and processes:
building permitsdevelopment chargesland development


Title: View our Parking in Kitchener page
Parking updates
Subscribe to this page to get an email when we post an update.
June 2024
On Tuesday, July 2, 2024, the City Hall parking garage will be closed for approximately five weeks for unavoidable maintenance. As a result of this work, the City Hall parking garage will be closed from July 2 until August 6, 2024.
During this construction, we will transfer monthly City Hall parking permit holders to the Duke & Ontario parking garage, located at 33 Duke Street North. The entrance to the garage is located on the south side of Duke Street, between Ontario and Queen Streets. Beginning July 2 and until the end of the construction, your monthly parking account will be transferred to the Duke & Ontario parking garage. We will let monthly parking permit holders know when the City Hall parking garage is open.
We will also have temporary free 30-minute parking/loading zones on Young and College Streets to accommodate daycare drop-off and pick-up, retail customers and City Hall visitors.
February 2024
Our new licence plate recognition system is now available at all parking garages. The new licence plate recognition system has phased out the old transponder system. All surface lots have transitioned over to licence plate monthly permits, and mirror hang tags have been eliminated.
Pay and display machines have been replaced by pay-by-plate machines in the following surface lots as of Monday, February 12: Lots seven, nine, 14, 15, 19a, 19b, 22, 23 and 24.
The new pay-by-plate machines will soon be installed in lots three, 12, 13, 16 and 25 – the new surface lot located on Eby Street under the overhang at the Kitchener Market.
Pay for monthly parking
If you need to park downtown or around Grand River Hospital on a regular basis, request amonthly parking permit.
Pay for hourly parking
There are many hourly parking options in downtown Kitchener and around Grand River Hospital.Find a place to park, thenpay for hourly parkingfrom your phone or a kiosk.
Parking bylaws
Visit ourparking bylaws pageto find:
street parking bylawsboulevard parking rules
Request an exemptionto park in a legal parking spot overnight between December 1 and March 31.
Accessible parking
Accessible parking is available in all of our parking lots and garages except for Queen Street North and Scott Street.
Look for the icon below to find accessible parking spots.
Car share
Communautooffers car share spots in these parking lots:
Water Street SouthQueen Street South
Look for the icon below to find a Communauto car share spot.
Bike parking
Visit ourbike parking pageto request access to locked bike parking areas inside all parking garages.
There are many bike racks downtown where you can park your bike. If you see the icon below on a sign at one of our parking lots, there is free bike parking available.
Electric vehicle charging
You can charge your electric vehicle at any of our parking garages. There is also an electric vehicle charging station on-street on Francis Street at the corner of Joseph Street.
Look for the icon below to find electric vehicle charging.


Title: View our Roads page
Quick Links
Road closuresInteractive dashboard with road closures in Kitchener, including opening dates.
Road constructionLearn about road construction in Kitchener, including cost and contracts.
How road construction affects youLearn how road construction may impact your neighbourhood and commute.
PotholesLearn about pothole conditions and report a pothole on your route.
Traffic calmingFormal, seasonal and resident-led traffic calming. Making our roads safer.
Bike infrastructureLearn about bike lanes, multi-use trails, bike boxes and other infrastructure.
Snow removalSidewalk shovelling, overnight parking, snow events and snowplow routes.
Parking bylawsOur parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Grand River TransitThe Region of Waterloo's public transit system, including light rail transit.
Road occupancy or work permitsYou need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Regional roadsList of roads owned by the Region of Waterloo.
Traffic signalsThe Region of Waterloo manages traffic signals in Kitchener.
Road closures
Interactive dashboard with road closures in Kitchener, including opening dates.
Road construction
Learn about road construction in Kitchener, including cost and contracts.
How road construction affects you
Learn how road construction may impact your neighbourhood and commute.
Potholes
Learn about pothole conditions and report a pothole on your route.
Traffic calming
Formal, seasonal and resident-led traffic calming. Making our roads safer.
Bike infrastructure
Learn about bike lanes, multi-use trails, bike boxes and other infrastructure.
Snow removal
Sidewalk shovelling, overnight parking, snow events and snowplow routes.
Parking bylaws
Our parking regulations, including on-street and boulevard parking.
Grand River Transit
The Region of Waterloo's public transit system, including light rail transit.
Road occupancy or work permits
You need a work permit to occupy or close any city road, sidewalk or boulevard to conduct work or other activities.
Regional roads
List of roads owned by the Region of Waterloo.
Traffic signals
The Region of Waterloo manages traffic signals in Kitchener.


Title: View our Decision making process page
Standing committee meeting
Staff prepare an issue report that includes context and recommendations to the standing committee most closely related to the matter at hand.
Councillors use standing committee meetings to discuss an issue, and either adopt, amend, defeat or defer the related recommendations.
Ourstanding committeesare:
community and infrastructure services committeeplanning and strategic initiatives committeefinance and corporate services committee
City council meeting
After a standing committee meeting, staff summarize the decision made by the committee and submit the report to city council for final resolution at their next meeting.
City council is also responsible for making decisions on other matters, including bylaws, and receiving presentations and delegations.
Attend a meeting
Standing committee and city council meetings are open to the public, andmeeting agendas and minutesare available ahead of time.
Register as a delegation
If you want to address a committee or city council during a meeting, you canregister as a delegation.
Watch a meeting
We livestream meetings on our website. You canwatch a live meeting or a past meeting.
Rogers TValso regularly broadcasts council meetings. Past council meetings are posted on their website.
2023-2026 city council
Learn about each member of city council:
mayor:Berry Vrbanovicward 1:Scott Daveyward 2:Dave Schniderward 3:Jason Deneaultward 4:Christine Michaudward 5:Ayo Owodunniward 6:Paul Singhward 7:Bil Ioannidisward 8:Margaret Johnstonward 9:Debbie Chapmanward 10:Stephanie Stretch


Title: View our Zoning page
Quick Links
Zoning bylawBylaw information about land, types of buildings, parking and street setbacks.
Zoning bylaw amendmentTo change the permitted use of a property, you must apply for a zoning bylaw amendment.
Zoning (occupancy) certificateA zoning (occupancy) certificate confirms that a change of use to a commercial building is allowed under our zoning bylaw.
Letter of zoning complianceIf you’re buying, selling or mortgaging a property, you may need a letter of zoning compliance.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.
Zoning bylaw
Bylaw information about land, types of buildings, parking and street setbacks.
Zoning bylaw amendment
To change the permitted use of a property, you must apply for a zoning bylaw amendment.
Zoning (occupancy) certificate
A zoning (occupancy) certificate confirms that a change of use to a commercial building is allowed under our zoning bylaw.
Letter of zoning compliance
If you’re buying, selling or mortgaging a property, you may need a letter of zoning compliance.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)
Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.


Title: View our Housing For All page
About the strategy
We know the importance of strong and diverse neighbourhoods where residents can grow and thrive. That’s why we’re developing a new housing strategy and working to make housing across Kitchener more affordable.
We’re working with these groups to find solutions that will increase housing options across the housing continuum:
our advisory committeeRegion of Waterloocommunity groupsmembers of the non-profit sectordevelopment industry
On December 14, 2020, staff presented therecommended strategyto council.
Advisory committee
Our advisory committee is made up of members of the public, city councillors, community partners, development industry professionals, academics, city staff and regional housing staff. This committee has played a key role in building the strategy.
public: Kathy Hamilton, Linda Terry, Martin Asling, Margaret Ellis-Young, Karen Taylor-Harrison, Regan Sunshine Brussé, Charles Nichols, Alan Praught, Janice BockKitchener city council: Debbie Chapman, Christine Michaud, Dave Schnider, Paul Singhnon-profit: Lori Trumper, Elizabeth Clarke, Karen Coviello, Dan Driedger, Aleksandra Petrovic Graonic, Jessica Bondy, Joe Mancini, Al Mills, Carl Cadoganindustry: Alex Sumner, Mike Maxwell, George Bikas, Stephen Litt, Tracey AppletonRegion of Waterloo: Ryan PettipiereLHIN: Rhonda Wideman
Project updates
We'll post Housing for All projects below. Subscribe to this page to get an email when we add something new.
Lodging House bylaw review
We're reviewing our licensing bylaws to improve resident health and safety, consumer protection and nuisance control. We currently license Lodging Houses, otherwise known as rooming houses. We do not currently license short-term accommodation or property rentals. Learn more onEngage Kitchener.
To complement to licensing bylaw update, we are also updating thezoning bylawto permit lodging houses more widely in Kitchener.
Staff plan to bring the licensing and zoning bylaw updates to city council later in 2023 or in early 2024.
Rental housing, eviction and displacement study
We're exploring ways to support tenants in Kitchener who rent their homes. One of the tools available to cities is a rental replacement bylaw, which would apply when six or more rental units are demolished. We're conducting a financial analysis on this tool and what it might mean for current renters and developers. Staff plan to bring a report that covers the full range of tools available in Kitchener to support renters to city council in late 2023.
YWKW Block Line supportive housing project for women
City council voted to provide a 50-year lease to the YWKW for new supportive housing. The project will have 41 units of supportive housing for women experiencing homelessness.
This project is supported by funding from:
City of KitchenerRegion of WaterlooRapid Housing Initiative funding from the Canadian Mortgage and Housing Corporation
OneROOF supportive housing for youth
We're supporting OneROOF as they develop 44 units of supportive housing for youth. This new build will ensure all youth who are homeless in Waterloo Region will have a place to live.
Learn more about the project.
Backyard homes and tiny houses
We're committed to building a caring community and finding solutions to the affordable housing crisis. Tiny houses, laneway suites and backyard homes add to the mix and range of housing in Kitchener. These all fall under the permit category of Additional Dwelling Units. We updated our zoning by law to allow for these on most residential properties.
Learn more aboutadditional dwelling units.
Collaboration with The Shift - Leilani Farha's op-ed in the Waterloo Region Record
We worked with The Shift on a project to realize the right to housing in Kitchener. The Shift is a global housing advocacy group and will be leading the project. Leilani Farha is The Shift's Global Director and former UN Special Rapporteur on the right to housing.
Read Leilani Farha's op-ed on Housing For All in the Waterloo Region Record.
A Better Tent City
We're working with the Waterloo Region District School Board andThe Working Centreto support A Better Tent City (ABTC). In 2021, A Better Tent City moved beside the Waterloo Region District School Board (WRDSB) office on Ardelt Avenue.Watch the CTV News coverageabout the success of ABTC one year after the move to their current location.
Peter J. Marshall Innovation Award
At the 2021AMOConference, we were presented with the Peter J. Marshall Innovation Award. The P.J. Marshall Award is an annual competitive process to acknowledge municipalities who have had creativity and success in implementing new, innovative ways of serving the public. It is sponsored by AMO, the Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing, the Association of Municipal Managers, Clerks & Treasurers of Ontario, the Canadian Council for Public Private Partnerships, the Municipal Finance Officers’ Association, and the Ontario Municipal Administrators’ Association.
For more information, readAMO's media release.
Project phases
The Housing for All project had five phases:
project planninghousing needs assessmentissues and optionsprepare housing strategy and inclusionary zoningapproval
Learn more about each phase below.
Phase 1: Project planning
In the first phase of this project, we:
established a work plancreated the advisory committee
For more information, read thestaff report.
Phase 2: Housing needs assessment
Staff worked with the advisory committee to develop ahousing needs assessment. We brought this assessment to the Community & Infrastructure Services Committee on January 13, 2020.
This report has since been updated with full 2019 data.
Phase 3: Issues and options
Identify action options to address housing challenges, identify implications and possible directions of Inclusionary Housing Policy and zoning.
Community stakeholders including members of the public, non-profit community, and the development industry were engaged through an Engage Kitchener Survey and through interviews. Engagement for this phase is now complete.
For more information, read thesurvey engagement summary.
Phase 4: Prepare housing strategy & inclusionary zoning
Phase 4a
Staff presented the first draft of the housing strategy to council on August 31, 2020.
Read more:
draft housing strategystaff report
Phase 4b
Staff brought the Inclusionary Zoning for Affordable Housing: Background and Fiscal Impact Analysis report to the Planning & Strategic Initiatives Committee on September 28, 2020.
Phase 5: Approval
Staff presented the recommended Housing Strategy titled, “Housing For All” to Council on December 14, 2020.
Housing for Allstaff report
Documents and resources
Affordable Housing Strategy - Work Program OverviewHousing Needs Assessment ReportIssues and Options Engagement SummaryCity of Kitchener Draft Housing StrategyInclusionary Zoning for Affordable Housing: Background and Fiscal Impact AnalysisHousing For All


Title: Leaf collection
Leaf collection options
Watch the video below to learn about your leaf collection options:
Mulching and composting
Leaves still have lots of value to offer the environment after they fall. Dry leaves are a carbon-rich ingredient for your compost pile that you can re-use to enrich your garden and soil.
Here’s what you can do to re-use leaves at home:
empty your lawn mower’s bagging unit and mowing it over again creates a mulch to fertilize your lawnrake whole leaves onto your garden beds to feed earthworms and promote growthwait until the ground freezes before mulching, this keeps soil frozen during mild spells, protecting your plantsadd dry leaves to your compost pile – alternate layers of leaves and kitchen wastelearn more from theComposting Council of Canada
Yard waste
You can use theRegion of Waterloo bagged yard waste programfor your leaves. Check your neighbourhood schedule for when your yard waste collection week is.
Leaf drop-off sites
We operate eight leaf drop-off sites. Drop off sites are in neighbourhoods across Kitchener and will be open seven days a week during daylight hours from Friday, October 13 to Friday, December 8.
Our drop-off sites are:
Schaefer Park- Bloomingdale RoadBreithaupt Park- Kinsman Park, off Union StreetKitchener Auditorium- Ottawa Street North entranceMeinzinger Park Soccer Fields- Homer Watson BoulevardLions Arena- Rittenhouse RoadUpper Canada Park- Pioneer DriveCherry Park- Strange Street and Waverly RoadHofstetter Park- 40 Hofstetter Ave.
Drop-off sites are for leaves only (no yard or household waste). The following guidelines apply to these sites:
if you are using bags to transport your leaves to a drop off site, empty your leaves loose and take your bags with you. No bags, including paper yard waste bags will be accepted at the drop off sites.any other materials left at drop off locations are considered illegal dumping and will be subject to a fine. City staff will monitor the drop off sites and take a zero-tolerance approach with offenderscommercial haulers are not permitted on the leaf drop off sites
Curbside collection
We collect loose leaves in neighbourhoods with significant tree cover on aset schedule. Just like garbage collection, each neighbourhood has a designated week for pick-up.
Check ourleaf collection scheduleto find your collection options and pick-up dates.
When raking leaves to the road for curbside collection, please:
don’t rake your leaves to the road any earlier then the weekend before your collection date. If raking earlier, only rake leaves to the boulevard or your lawn and move them onto the street on your collection dateensure leaves are raked out before 7 a.m. on your collection datenever rake leaves onto a storm drain. Storm drains drain stormwater and prevent flooding.
The curbside collection schedule is based on weather conditions. Historically, winter conditions including freezing temperatures and snow fall happens in December, so leaf collection is scheduled in November. Snow fall makes raking and leaf collection more challenging for residents and staff.
If more leaves have fallen after your scheduled collection week, you can use our leaf drop-off sites until December 10 or the Region’syard waste program.
Keep streets safe and prevent flooding
Please do not rake or blow leaves onto:
storm drainssidewalksbike lanes
Raking or blowing leaves onto the street or sidewalk can create a safety hazard for pedestrians and cyclists and can cause flooding if a storm drain is blocked.
If you see a blocked storm drain, call519-741-2345.


Title: Projects
Quick Links
Audit and accountability fundA third-party reviewer completed reports on our fleet downtime and energy usage.
Building Kitchener TogetherA group of initiatives that will provide a significant boost to Kitchener’s housing supply.
City Hall outdoor spacesImproving infrastructure components at City Hall and surrounding streets.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.
Digital KitchenerWe're making Kitchener more digitally inclusive and innovative.
Downtown Kitchener VisionWe're working with the community to build a new vision for downtown Kitchener.
Growing TogetherThe City of Kitchener is growing, and a lot of that growth is happening in the areas around the ION LRT system.
Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC)We plan to build a new multi-purpose indoor recreation complex at RBJ Schlegel Park.
Neighbourhood planning reviewsReview of land use and planning frameworks in Kitchener neighbourhoods.
Park development and improvementsDeveloping new, or updating existing, parks, trails and natural areas.
Queen Victoria StatueExploring the history and impacts of the Queen Victoria statue in Victoria Park.
Residential intensification in established neighbourhoods studyPolicy and regulation review of developments in established communities.
Roos Island renewalRoos Island is currently closed for the completion of infrastructure upgrades and landscaping work.
Audit and accountability fund
A third-party reviewer completed reports on our fleet downtime and energy usage.
Building Kitchener Together
A group of initiatives that will provide a significant boost to Kitchener’s housing supply.
City Hall outdoor spaces
Improving infrastructure components at City Hall and surrounding streets.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)
Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.
Digital Kitchener
We're making Kitchener more digitally inclusive and innovative.
Downtown Kitchener Vision
We're working with the community to build a new vision for downtown Kitchener.
Growing Together
The City of Kitchener is growing, and a lot of that growth is happening in the areas around the ION LRT system.
Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC)
We plan to build a new multi-purpose indoor recreation complex at RBJ Schlegel Park.
Neighbourhood planning reviews
Review of land use and planning frameworks in Kitchener neighbourhoods.
Park development and improvements
Developing new, or updating existing, parks, trails and natural areas.
Queen Victoria Statue
Exploring the history and impacts of the Queen Victoria statue in Victoria Park.
Residential intensification in established neighbourhoods study
Policy and regulation review of developments in established communities.
Roos Island renewal
Roos Island is currently closed for the completion of infrastructure upgrades and landscaping work.


Title: View our Demolition control page
Permits you need for demolition
You need to obtain demolition control approval before demolishing any residential building in the demolition control area (R-1 through R-6 in zoning bylaw 85-01 and RES1 through RES-6 in zoning bylaw 2019-051).
Depending on the property you want to demolish, you may need more permits or approvals.
Redeveloping a property
You must also submit abuilding permit application (including a demolition permit)and/or asite plan application. You can do this before you apply for demolition control or at the same time as your demolition control application.
Ontario Heritage Act designated property
You must apply for aheritage permitbefore we consider your demolition control application.
Non-designated property of cultural heritage value or interest
If the property is listed on the Municipal Heritage Register but not designated under the Ontario Heritage Act, city council must determine the heritage status of the property. We will not consider your demolition control application until council determines the property’s heritage status.
Please send us an email to inquire about demolishing a property listed on the Municipal Heritage Register.
Apply for demolition control
To apply for a demolition control permit:
complete ourapplication formandsend it to staff by email, then send the original signed application and cheque to the address belowsend a cheque payable to the City of Kitchener by mail or courier to the address below
Attn: Manager of Development ReviewPlanning DivisionCity of Kitchener200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4G7
Exemptions
Your demolition may not require a demolition control approval. We exempt demolitions that are:
outside the demolition control area (R-1 through R-6 in zoning bylaw 85-01 and RES1 through RES-6 in zoning bylaw 2019-051)necessary for environmental remediation of the propertyrequired for a public work or service approved by the Citya mobile homeexempted by provincial or federal regulation
Even if you qualify for an exemption, you must apply and receive a demolition control exemption before we will issue a demolition permit.
Ourapplication formexplains the documents required for an exemption.
Approval by staff
Staff have been given authority to approve applications if:
the property is part of a building permit or site plan applicationthe property is within a draft plan of subdivision with a registered pre-servicing agreementstaff determine there is a threat to the health, safety or security of the community
Approval by council
If your property has status under the Ontario Heritage Act or does not meet one of our delegated authority criteria, the application will be decided by Kitchener city council.
The same fees and application form apply for a demolition control approval through council. Staff will prepare a report that goes before city council for approval.
Standard approval conditions
If your application is approved by staff or council, you will need to agree to our standard approval conditions:
receive a building permit for the redeveloped property; and/or,obtain site plan approval for the redeveloped property; and,the redevelopment must be complete within two years.
If the redevelopment of the property isn’t complete within two years, a lien of $20,000 per dwelling unit will be added to the property.


Title: View our Education page
School boards
There are four public school boards in the Region of Waterloo:
Waterloo Region District School Board: oversees Waterloo Region’s public schoolsWaterloo Catholic District School Board: oversees Waterloo Region’s public Catholic schoolsConseil scolaire catholique MonAvenir/MonAvenir Catholic School Board: separate, French-language-based school board for the Greater Golden HorseshoeConseil scolaire Viamonde/Viamonde School Board: public, French-language-based school board for the central south-west region of Ontario
Private schools
Private schools in Kitchener or nearby include:
AIM Learning CommunityBlyth Academy WaterlooCarmel New Church SchoolVerideia Classical Christian AcademyFoundation Christian SchoolThe K-W Montessori SchoolKitchener-Waterloo Bilingual SchoolLaurentian Hills Christian SchoolOne Forest Montessori SchoolPathways Educational ServicesRockway Mennonite CollegiateSt. John's Kilmarnock SchoolSt. Judes SchoolScholars' HallStanford AcademySunshine Montessori SchoolWoodland Christian High School
English as a second language
TheWaterloo Catholic District School Boardoffers English as a second language programs for adults. In these programs, you’ll develop your speaking, listening, reading and writing skills. Morning, afternoon and evening classes are available.
English at Firstoffers English Language Instruction to Newcomers to Canada (the LINC program). Childcare is also available.
Conestoga Collegeoffers programs for new Canadians.
Your localcommunity centremay offer English as a second language classes. Please checkActive Kitcheneror call your local community centre.
Colleges and universities
Colleges
Conestoga Collegehas two campuses in Kitchener:DoonandDowntown. The job placement rate for graduates six months after they finish their programs is 94.2%.
triOS Collegehas programs in business, healthcare, law and more. Their campus is in downtown Kitchener.
Universities
TheUniversity of Waterloo’s health sciences campus, including their School of Pharmacy, is in downtown Kitchener.
Wilfrid Laurier University’s Faculty of Social Work is in downtown Kitchener, across the street from City Hall.
Continuing education
Continuing education is the perfect choice if you want to change careers, update your skills or find a new hobby.
We offer learning and skill-building opportunities through ourcommunity centres. More programming is available through our localneighbourhood associations. You can find a full list of available courses inActive Kitchener.
If you want to continue learning in a classroom setting, consider courses and programs offered by these organizations:
Conestoga College - Continuing educationSt. Louis Adult Learning and Continuing Education CentresUniversity of Waterloo - Centre for Extended LearningWaterloo Region District School Board - Continuing educationWilfrid Laurier University - Continuing education


Title: View our Residential building permits page
Do I need a building permit?
Depending on your project, you may need a building permit to continue. Visit ourwebpageto learn if you need a building permit or if you can continue without applying for one.
How to apply for a building permit
You can apply for your building permit online or in person. All projects must follow ourzoning bylaw.
Online
Use ouronline services. After you apply, you can check the status of your permit and schedule any city inspections.
In person
To apply for a building permit in person, pleasebook an appointment. Please bring your completed forms and drawings to your appointment.
Application processing
We will review your application within 10 business days.
After we review the application, our staff will email you to let you know the permit is ready to issue. If we need more information, we’ll send you a status letter with a list of issues that need to be addressed before we issue the permit.
There is no legislated timeframe for further reviews. If you get a status letter, the length of time will depend on the list of deficiencies that need to be addressed and any communication between the applicant and staff.
Miscellaneous permits and applications
Visit ourmiscellaneous permits and applications pageto find requirements for these applications:
adding solar panelsadding a backflow deviceinstalling or altering a septic systememergency water service repairwater, sewer, storm replacement or repairtents
Fence variance
If your fence does not meet the requirements of ourfence bylaw, you can make an application for a variance request.
Download theapplication formand submit it with the fee to ourplanning division.
Review the fence variance process:
for fences on interior lots, all abutting property owners get written notice of the request and have the opportunity to express commentsfor street flanking fences on corner lots, all property owners within a 30 metre radius get written notice of the request and have the opportunity to share their commentsplanning staff may also circulate and get input from other departments or agencies with an interest in the application
If there are no concerns, the process takes approximately three weeks. Approval may be subject to conditions, which must be fulfilled in order to finalize the variance.
If there are objections from the community, staff will attempt to address the concerns or seek a compromise with the applicant. If the concerns cannot be resolved, or if staff do not support the requested variance, community members or the applicant will have the opportunity to appeal the staff recommendation to city council.
Current variance applications
May 8, 2023 -77 Franklin Street North
Interior alterations and finishing your basement
You need a building permit for interior alterations, including partial and full basement finishing projects.
Use the accordions below to find the requirements to apply for this building permit.
Feespermit fee: $0.37 per square foot or $95 (minimum)rebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Process guideprocess guide - interior alterationsFormsapplication formschedule 1 form, completed by a qualified designer or homeownerProject Information: ResidentialConstruction drawingswindow and door sizesroom nameskitchen and/or bathroom layoutlocation of stairs, furnace, etc.new wall constructionlocation of existing ducting or overhead beamsceiling height
Building a deck or porch
You need a building permit to build a deck or porch if:
it is 24 inches (2 feet) or more above the ground, measured at any pointyour deck will be covered by a permanent roof
Feespermit fee: $95Formsapplication formSite planShow these items on your site plan:dimensions of the deckdistance from the deck to the property linesother structures in the area (example: shed, pool)Construction drawingsbuilding centre drawings or hand drawn to scale and dimensionedPlan view showingpostsfloor joistsbeamsstairslandingsSide viewshowingheight of deck and guardGuards and railingsUnder the Ontario Building Code, you can install wooden guards or railings.If you want to install anything other than wooden guards or railings, you need to include the package of details from your supplier.You cannot install hollow plastic or vinyl guards or railings.Approved decking materials5/4” wood deckingall other decking products require approval and documentation, pleasesend us an emailto learn moreStandard detailsdetails, elevations, layout and span tables
Building an addition
You need a building permit to build an addition on your home.
Feespermit fee: $1.07 per square footrebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Formsapplication formschedule 1 form– completed by the listed homeowner or a qualified designerenergy efficiency design summary (performance)energy efficiency design summary (prescriptive)Project Information: ResidentialIf the addition is 25% or more of the existing building’s heated area:schedule 1 form – HVAC qualified designerSite planShow these items in your site plan:property boundariesexisting building(s)other structure locations (example: shed)proposed location of the additiondimensions and distance to the property lines of the proposed additionConstruction drawingsFloor plansnote and size all structural elements such as floor joints, rafters, beams, columns, lintels, and footing pad sizeswindow/door locations and width and heightroom names including finished basementsstair location and direction, cabinets and fixtures (fridges, stove, sinks, etc.)show Smoke Alarm and Carbon Monoxide Detectordimensions of interior and exterior walls and overall dimensionsprovide floor area totals in square feet for each level including basementdeck plan and guard details (if applicable)Elevationsshow size and location of existing window and door openingslabel wall cladding and roofing materialshow finished gradeshow footing and foundations below grade (broken lines) including steps in foundationWall sections and details (cross-section)show materials to be used on sectionprovide construction notes for:exterior and interior wall assembliesall floors assembliesroof / ceiling assembliesfootings and foundationweeping tile and damp proofinglocate finished grade, dimension grade to exterior claddingdimensions for all floor heightsdetails for:items that are not typical and/or clarify constructionexamples – plans view for unique stair, guards, deck connection to house, section of cathedral / vaulted ceilingOther informationtruss layout drawings (if applicable)pre-engineering floor joist layout drawings (if applicable)
Pool permit
You need a pool enclosure permit for all types of pools capable of containing water at least 36 inches or greater in depth. This includes hot tubs, swim spas, in-ground and above ground pools and inflatable pools.
If the hot tub or swim spa has a lockable cover, you do not need a pool enclosure permit.
Feespermit fee: $95Formspool enclosure application formProject Information: ResidentialSite planShow these items on your site plan:location and configuration of the proposed pooldistance to all property lines and existing buildingfence locations which confirm compliance with the fence bylaw and includes the type of constructionReminderwhen installing a pool, consider other bylaws and policies around grading, zoning and fencesreview thepool enclosure requirementsvisit ourbackyard pools and hot tubs pageto learn about pool drainingIf you live in a newer subdivision, your property may have an infiltration gallery. To find out if your property has an infiltration gallery and where it might be located call us at 519-741-2312.If you either uncover or damage an infiltration gallery when installing a pool, there may be repairs or relocation required. As the homeowner, it is your responsibility to contact a contractor to assess the damage to the infiltration gallery and/or relocate it somewhere else on the property. These infiltration galleries are important to the overall Stormwater Management design of the subdivision and must remain in functioning order.If you have any questions, call 519-741-2406.
Building a new home
You need a building permit to build a new residential building, including:
detached homesemi-detached homedetached duplexrowhouse
Feespermit fee: $1.07 per square footrebate fee: $500 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)development chargesother fees such as a damage deposit fee and a stormwater management fee may apply. Please see our webpage for a more detailed explanationPermit requirementsAll documents and drawings must be submitted in PDF format. When uploading the permit requirements, please combine related documents into files when applying. All forms should be in one document with drawings in another document.permit applicationschedule 1 designer information form(one for HVAC and one for house design)heat loss/heat gain calculationsmechanical summary formenergy efficiency design summary(when drawings do not include this as a matrix)site grading planone set of software generated drawingsDrawings must be fully dimensioned, drawn at minimum 3/16"= 1'-0" and note all sizes and types of construction materials to be used and their respective locations, finishes to all walls, ceilings and floors and all existing and proposed fire separations. We do not accept scanned drawings.Forms and plans that may be applicabletruss layout drawingssewage system designschedule 2 – sewage system installer information formlot grading planfoundation planfloor plansframing plansroof plansbuilding elevationssections and detailspre-engineered floor joist layout drawingsDesigner requirementsAll submitted drawings must be prepared by either the owner, or prepared and reviewed by a qualified designer, architect, professional engineer or a combination. Some drawings must be designed by a professional engineer when the design falls outside of the prescriptive requirements of the Building Code.The Building Code requires qualified, registered designers, who review and take responsibility for design activities, to include the following information on documents submitted to a chief building official or registered code agency:name and building code identification number (BCIN) of the registered firmstatement that the qualified person has reviewed and taken responsibility for the design activitiesname, BCIN and signature of the qualified person
Adding a carport or attached garage
You need a building permit to build a carport or attached garage when:
108 square feet or larger (new or replacement)when it’s attached to another structure, like your home
Feespermit fee: $95 per bayrebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Formsapplication formschedule 1 form, completed by a qualified designer or homeownerProject Information: ResidentialSite planShow these items on your site plan:location of the proposed carport or attached garagedimensions and distance from proposed structure to property linesother structures in the area (example: deck, pool)Construction drawingsPlan viewwindow and door sizesfloor, wall and roof constructionconnection to existing structure (only if attached)Front and side viewheight of structureexterior materialsStandard detailscarport detailsProcess guidebuilding a carport guide
Building a detached garage or accessory structure (other than a shed)
You need a building permit to build a detached garage or accessory structure (other than a shed):
the proposed structure, new or replaced, is 108 square feet or larger measured to the outside of exterior wallsthe proposed structure is attached to another structure (like your home)the proposed structure has plumbing
Feespermit fee: $95 per accessory building or per bay of garagerebate fee: $250 (for garages only, automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Process guideprocess guide - detached garage or accessory structure (other than a shed)Formsapplication formProject Information: ResidentialIf the proposed structure is larger than 592 square feet, you need a schedule 1 designer form. You will need to complete the drawings with a qualified designer.Qualified designers need to include their:nameBCIN #designer statementsignature on the planscompletedschedule 1 formSite planShow these items on your site plan:location of the proposed accessory building or garagedimensions and distance from building to property lineother structures in the area (example: deck, pool)Construction drawingsPlan viewwindow and door sizesfloor, wall and roof constructionconnection to existing structure (only if attached)Front and side viewheight of structureexterior materialsStandard detailsdetached garage and shed – floating slabdetached garage and shed – cross-sectiondetached garage and shed – mudsill anchorage
Building a shed
You need a building permit to build a shed if the proposed shed, new or replaced, is:
more than 161 square feetmore than one storeyattached to another structureused for any purpose other than storagehas plumbing
Feespermit fee: $95 per shedProcess guideprocess guide - shedFormsapplication formProject Information: ResidentialIf the proposed shed is larger than 592 square feet, you need a schedule 1 designer form. You will need to complete the drawings with a qualified designer.Qualified designers need to include their:nameBCIN #designer statementsignature on the planscompletedschedule 1 formSite planShow these items on your site plan:location of the proposed sheddimensions and distance from shed to property lineother structures in the area (example: deck, pool)Construction drawingsPlan viewwindow and door sizesfloor, wall and roof constructionconnection to existing structure (only if attached)Front and side viewheight of structureexterior materialsStandard detailsdetached garage and shed – floating slabdetached garage and shed – cross-sectiondetached garage and shed – mudsill anchorage
Adding a duplex or granny flat
You need a building permit to add a duplex. Duplexes can also be called in-law suites, accessory apartments or granny flats.
Feespermit fee: $0.37 per square foot of finished space (or $163 minimum)rebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Process guideprocess guide - duplexesguide to a successful inspection - duplexFormsapplication formschedule 1 form, completed by a qualified designer or homeownerProject Information: ResidentialIf you're installing a separate heating system:schedule 1 designer information form- completed by HVAC qualified BCIN designerheat loss/heat gain calculationsConstruction drawings - new residential unitwindow/door sizes – include glass arearoom nameskitchen/bathroom layoutstair, furnace, etc. locationlocation of any existing walls and ceilings – indicate existing constructionnew wall/ceiling constructionnew beam sizes and supportslocation of existing ducting or overhead beamsceiling heightlocation of proposed separation between unitsConstruction drawings - retained residential unitwindow/door locationsroom names and locationsstair, furnace etc. locationnew wall construction
Removing a load-bearing wall
You need a building permit to remove a load-bearing wall, column, lintel or beam.
Feespermit fee: $95rebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Formsapplication formschedule 1 form, completed by the listed homeowner or a qualified designerConstruction drawingsPlan view – for the floor level where the wall is being removeddirection of the existing floor joists spannew beam sizes and supportsdistance measure from the new beam to the next wall or beam that is supporting the floor joists (for each side of the beam)Plan view – for all floor levels above and below the floor where the wall is being removeddirection of the existing floor joists spanall existing beams below the new posts from above and their sizes and post locationsdistance measured from the existing beam to the next wall or beam that is supporting the floor joists (for each side of the beam)Process guideremoving a load-bearing wall guide
Changing an HVAC system
You need a permit to change your HVAC heating system.
Feespermit fee: $95 (per residential suite)rebate fee: $250 (automatically refunded when the final building inspection is approved)Formsapplication formschedule 1 formcompleted by BCIN HVAC designerheat loss/heat gain calculations(prepared by BCIN designer or professional engineer)
Demolition
You need a building permit to demolish any structure that is 108 square feet or larger. There are two types of residential demolitions:
shed, garage, roof structure, addition, etc.house, rowhouse, detached duplex unit, etc.
Minor demolition
Demolish a structure 108 square feet or larger including but not limited to a shed, garage, roof structure or addition.
Feespermit fee: $95Formsapplication formminor demolition agreement formDrawingsSite plan showing the size and location of the existing structure to be demolished, as well as property lines.Fences at demolition sitesWhere, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official or Inspector, a demolition site presents a hazard to the public, the Chief Building Official or Inspector may require the owner to erect fences to fully enclose all areas of the site which prevent a hazard.
Residential demolition
Demolish or remove a residential building including but not limited to a house, rowhouse or detached duplex.
Feespermit fee: $95rebate fee and engineering fee may be applicableFormsapplication formdemolition agreement formdemolition tracking sheetswith all sign-offs completedDrawingspre-grading plan, prepared by a professional engineer or an Ontario land surveyorpost-grading plan, prepared by a professional engineer or an Ontario land surveyorDemolition controlIf the structure has any residential units, you must also complete ademolition control agreement.Fences at demolition sitesWhere, in the opinion of the Chief Building Official or Inspector, a demolition site presents a hazard to the public, the Chief Building Official or Inspector may require the owner to erect fences to fully enclose all areas of the site which prevent a hazard.


Title: View our Fun facts page
Berlin to Kitchener
the first Warden of the Village of Berlin after its incorporation was John Scott in 1854.the first council of the Village of Berlin in 1854 included G.W. Bowman, G. Jantz, J. Scott, H. Stroh and E. Ziegler.the first mayor of the Town of Berlin (1870) was Hugo Kranz.the first mayor of the City of Berlin (1912) was W. H. Schmalz.the first mayor of the City of Kitchener (1916) was J.E. Hett.
Referendums
Between 1922 and 1924, three referendum votes on specific money bylaws related to construction of a new City Hall were held. All garnered positive results, which enabled us to borrow funds for the construction and acquisition of lands. The new building was completed in 1924 at a total cost of $700,000 (including interest). Today, the building is affectionately referred to as"The Old City Hall."The 1930 referendum asked voters to pass a bylaw for market improvements; the bylaw passed.Daylight savings time was put to the voters in 1930, 1936 and 1957 - the year the decision finally passed.During the 1956 election, voters were asked to increase the council term to two years. The motion was narrowly defeated by 84 votes.The issue of movie-theatre openings was put to the public in 1960, 1962 and 1965 - the year the decision finally passed.Voters were asked to vote on the fluoridation of water in 1967 and did not passOn Dec. 6, 1971, by order of the Ontario Municipal Board, 55 per cent of residents voted for the existing City Hall (c.1924 -"The Old City Hall") and adjacent Farmers' Market (c.1907) to be demolished, in favour of new construction. The City Hall and Farmers' Market buildings were demolished in 1973 to make way for the new development known as the Oxlea Tower and Market Square.The question of regional amalgamation was put to the voters again in 2010. The same year, we increased our number of councillors from six to 10 to correspond with the increase in the number of wards.In 2010, voters in Bridgeport were asked to vote on the issue of water fluoridation.
Firsts
The first woman elected to council was Bette Swartz in 1963, followed by Edith MacIntosh in 1966 and Grace Stoner in 1970.In 1978, the first "computerized" election system was used when the Votomatic Vote Recorder was used, at an approximate cost of $61,500 US.The first televised council meeting in our new City Hall council chamber took place on Sept. 27, 1993.The first webcasting of a council meeting took place on Aug. 12, 2013.The first recount in Kitchener's history occurred in 2010 for Ward 9. The recount confirmed the original results; Debbie Chapman earned 1,688 votes and Frank Etherington earned 1,689 votes.
20 years of service
Past members of council who served for more than 20 years:
Henry Sturm: 1924 to 1926; 1928; 1930 to 1932; 1933 to 1934 (mayor); 1936 to 1942; 1944 to 1953C. Siebert: 1932; 1937 to 38; 1940 to 1945; 1947 to 1956; 1961Dominic Cardillo: 1963 to 1982; 1983 to 1994 (mayor)Jim Ziegler: 1981 to 2002John Smola: 1984 to 2010Geoff Lorentz: 1989 to 2010Carl Zehr: 1985 to 1994; 1997 to 2014 (mayor)
Election facts
Local voter turnout for our past municipal elections has ranged from 23 to 60 per cent.In 1978, the city was divided into 10 wards with a council of a mayor and 10 aldermen (one per ward). Eight of the aldermen also sat on regional council, as selected by a vote of city council.In 2010, the Province of Ontario moved each municipal election day from the second Monday in November to the last Monday in October.


Title: View our Park development and improvements page
Gaukel Pocket Park
We are building a brand new parkette in downtown Kitchener in the spring of 2024. Located on Gaukel Street between Halls Lane and Charles Street, the Gaukel Pocket Park will be a new place to connect in the heart of downtown, with a distinctive climbing structure, benches and planters.
Construction will start Thursday, April 25 and is targeted to be complete in time for the Victoria Day long weekend.
Gaukel Street between King Street and Halls Lane will be closed on April 25 and again from April 29 to May 1 for construction work.
Neighbourhood park upgrades
We're upgrading Kinzie, Idlewood and Oaten Parks. Construction began at Oaten Park in fall 2023 with final improvements to be completed in the spring of 2024. Construction at Idlewood Park and Kinzie Park will begin in the spring/summer of 2024.
Learn more onEngage Kitchener.
Places and Spaces
Staff are continuing to refresh theparks strategic planthrough the development of Places and Spaces.
The first part (Spaces) was approved by Council on August 22, 2022, along with an updatedpark dedication bylaw.
Engagement continues for Places which will go to city council in early 2024 for approval. Learn more on how to get involved, and the current topic of engagement, atEngage Kitchener.
RBJ Schlegel Park
One of Kitchener’s newest parks, RBJ Schlegel opened to the public in 2020 after many years of planning and construction.
Phase 2 of the park works will see the former Farmhouse residence restored and re-purposed as a three-season washroom and change facility and a wide range of court amenities (basketball, pickleball and tennis) constructed. In addition, a maintenance building will be built on site.
Court amenities are now open to the public with periodic closures to complete final coloured coatings. The washroom continues its construction beyond its anticipated opening. Temporary washrooms will continue to be available on site in the interim. Existing amenities will be open during construction of Phase 2.
Expected completion: washroom opening spring 2024
Pedestrian bridge work
There are more than 70 pedestrian bridges in Kitchener connecting communities through our parks and trails. We’re are currently working to assess the condition and required repairs to the Victoria Park Bridge, leading to Roos Island.
Prospect Park
We're excited to add new park amenities and stormwater management at Prospect Park that meet the needs of visitors and improve the sustainability of the park. We expect that further community engagement will take place throughout 2024 to inform the design.
Learn more about this project onEngage Kitchener.
Vanier Park
Throughout April 2024, we will be making two small improvements to Vanier Park:
from April 8 to April 10, we will be installing a new piece of playground equipment at the existing playgroundthe playground will be closed during this timewhen the spring weather permits, we will be painting new lines on the existing basketball courts at the parkthe basketball courts will be closed during this time for approximately two days
Victoria Park Master Plan
We’re updating the Victoria Park Master Plan, the guiding document for public and city priorities within Victoria Park. We’ll review the park's existing conditions and amenities, analyze how it is being used and learn how it can better support the community in the future. This will help us develop a 10-year plan for improving, maintaining and operating the park.
As part of our analysis, we’re installing visual sensors throughout the park to help us learn how the park is being used and how we can improve the park to serve you better. The sensors use vision-based technology to capture count, speed and movement data for park users. The system does not collect personal identifying information and does not store video files.
Learn more on ourEngage page.
Westchester Park
In collaboration with the local community association and the #LoveMyHood program, we're installing a new basketball court at Westchester Park. The work is expected to take place in spring 2024.
Westwood Park Phase two
The second and final phase of construction at Westwood Park will be starting in spring 2024. We will keep as much of the playground as possible accessible during construction, but for certain portions of the work, we may need to close the playground.
This phase of construction will complete the practice cricket pitch, install the walking loop path, reconstruct the infiltration gallery and finish up some final work.
Construction will be completed this summer so the community can enjoy the new and improved Westwood Park throughout the season.
Westheights Park Natural Area restoration
We're developing a plan for the ecological management, restoration, and stewardship of the Westheights Park Natural Area (Westheights Park). Learn more and get involved onEngage Kitchener.


Title: View our Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy) page
About the review
The zoning bylaw states exactly how land can be used and where buildings or other structures can be located on a property.
The current bylaw is over 30 years old and needs to be updated to reflect our Official Plan.
The new zoning bylaw is being completed in stages. Stage 1 (non-residential zones) was approved in April 2019 following five years of work and consultation. Stage 2 (residential zones) was approved on March 21, 2022.
Stage 1 – non-residential zones
Zoning Bylaw 2019-051 (Stage 1)
Status: approved by council on April 29, 2019.
On April 29, 2019 council passed Stage 1 of the newzoning bylawfor Kitchener. Stage 1 approved the new non-residential zones and applied them to individual properties. These are now in effect. Learn more on ourzoning bylawpage.
Staff reports
DSD-19-049: Non Residential ZonesDSD 19-106: Deferred Items: Urban Growth Centre Bonusing/ZoningDSD 19-130: Deferred Items
Stage 2 - residential zones
Kitchener has more than 50,000 residential properties. We divided this stage into two parts:
stage 2a –new residential base zonesstage 2b –applying residential zones to properties
Stage 2a – residential base zones
Status: approved by council on May 17, 2021
The new residential base zones were approved by city council on May 17, 2021. The residential zones were added to zoning by-law 2019-051 and did not apply to any properties. The application of these new residential zones to specific properties is part of Stage 2b.
Read the staff reports here:
DSD-19-233: New Zoning By-law (Stage 2a) – Residential Base ZonesDSD-19-272: New Zoning By-law (Stage 2a) – Deferred Item: RES-3 Lot WidthDSD-2021-42: New Zoning By-law (Stage 2a) – Residential Base Zones
Stage 2b – applying residential zones to properties
Status: approved by council on March 21, 2022; fully in effect
Stage 2b applies the residential zones to properties and makes minor changes to the regulations of the new by-law 2019-051 to make implementation easier. The new residential zones were applied to properties on a ward-by-ward basis and were approved by council on March 21, 2022.
Review the related documents:
staff reportnotice of passingapproved zoning by-law


Title: View our Parking tickets page
Pay a ticket
You canpay your parking or non-parking ticket online. We accept Visa and MasterCard.
If you lost your ticket or have any questions, call 519-741-2345.
There is a $1.50 charge for online payments.
Can’t find your ticket number in our system?
It may take up to 14 days for your ticket to enter our system. If no results are found for your ticket number, please check back later.
Other payment methods
You can also:
pay in person, by cash, cheque or debit at City Hall’s Revenue Desk at200 King Street West(book an appointment) or at our bylaw enforcement office at33 Ontario Street Northdrop off a cheque with your ticket in a payment box onYoung Street outside of city hallmail your cheque payment to:
City of Kitchener - Revenue Division200 King St. W.P.O. Box 9058Kitchener, ON N2G 4G7
Bylaw guide
Visit ourbylaw guide pageto find our bylaws, including noise, parking, animals, fireworks and more.
Dispute a ticket
If you disagree with a ticket, you can request a review from a screening officer within 30 days of getting the ticket.
To request a review:
call 519-741-2345send us an email
If you request a review from a screening officers after the 30 day mark but before 60 days after getting the ticket, the screening officer will review the request and decide if a review of the ticket will happen.
After a screening officer reviews your ticket, you canrequest a review from a hearing officerif you are not satisfied with their decision. You must also make this request within 30 days of getting the ticket. This decision will be final and binding.
Hearing officers
A hearing officer is an independent, third-party contractor who holds hearings for parking penalties in Kitchener and Waterloo. Hearings take place once a month. The decision made by the hearing officer is final and binding.
Authorize a representative
You canauthorize someone to act on your behalfrelated to your ticket (including during a hearing). The registered owner of the vehicle needs to fill out the form and give their signed consent.
Submit a complaint
If you have concerns about the screening or hearing process,submit a complaint. You cannot submit a request or oppose a screening or hearing decision using this form.
Related documents
If you want to see disclosure documents related to your ticket, fill out ouronline form.
Request an extension
If you cannot address your ticket within the allowed timeframe, you canrequest an extension. We will only grant an extension if there are extenuating circumstances.


Title: View our Feedback about city services page
Share your feedback
If you have feedback regarding a city service, policy, program or staff member, there are several ways that you can provide that information to the division or office responsible for that service:
general complaintscomplaints about specific services or city facilitieshelp from the office of the mayor and councilOntario Ombudsman’s Office complaints
General complaints
Contact us at any time to make a general complaint:
send us an emailcall519-741-2345
Complaints about specific services or city facilities
If your complaint is about a specific service area or city facility, find the right phone number or link to email in ourstaff directory. On each page of our website, contact information is available in the right menu (on desktop) or at the bottom of the page (on mobile or tablet).
Help from the office of the mayor and council
If you’re looking for help from your ward councillor or the mayor, call 519-741-2300 or finddirect contact informationon our website.
Not sure who your councillor is? Use our online tool tofind your councillor.
Ontario Ombudsman’s Office complaints
If you have completed the internal process with city staff and are unsatisfied with the resolution, please contact theOntario Ombudsman’s Officeat 1-800-263-1830 orfile a complaint online.
What is a complaint?
We consider a complaint to be an expression of dissatisfaction related to a City of Kitchener program, service or staff member where you believe we have not provided a service experience to your satisfaction at the point of service delivery. There is also an expectation of a response or resolution.
Complaint process
After you submit your complaint, you can expect an acknowledgement that we’ve received your complaint within two business days. If it’s not possible to resolve your complaint immediately, staff will share your complaint with their management for further investigation. If we need more information to resolve your complaint, we may contact you. We will keep you informed and updated if an investigation takes longer than expected.
We try to resolve all complaints. However, we can’t guarantee that all complainants will be satisfied with the resolution.
Throughout this process, we expect that staff and customers will treat each other fairly, with dignity and respect. We also commit to:
provide professional, prompt and polite serviceacknowledge and resolve all complaints in a timely mannerfair and respectful follow-up and investigationsprovide a clear rationale for all decisionsexplain your options if you are dissatisfied with how your complaint was handleddeal with complaints in a confidential manner, according to the Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act
Resolution
We will share the outcome of your complaint with you as soon as possible. If you make a complaint, you should expect to get at least an initial response within 10 days of us receiving your initial communication. As much as possible (depending on the complexity of the issue), we will provide a final response or resolution within 20 business days.
Staff will be open and accountable when reporting back on complaints. Exceptions include but are not limited to:
if information is protected by MFIPPA or PIHPA regulations or if the release of information would unfairly invade someone’s privacy or defame an individualif the information is related to staff disciplinary action, the complainant will be informed that the matter is being investigated or has been resolved, but details cannot be providedif the complainant has indicated that they do not want to be contacted further
We consider a complaint to be closed when either:
the complainant accepts the resolutionwe conduct a full internal review and share with the complainant:feedback about the action or lack of action taken and whythat the matter is now considered closed


Title: Water and environment
Quick Links
StormwaterEffective and responsible management that protects our local water sources.
WatermainsOur 890 km of watermains deliver fresh, clean water to our community.
Sanitary sewer systemInfrastructure that collects, treats and returns wastewater to the environment.
Backflow preventionEnsuring water quality by reducing harmful backflow into the water system.
Kitchener UtilitiesOur natural gas and water utility company. Owned and operated by the city.
Trees and invasive speciesTree conservation, invasive species and our annual leaf collection program.
EnvironmentPolicies, plans and initiatives ensuring environmental planning and stewardship.
PollinatorsInformation about bees and creating a pollinator garden at home.
Stormwater
Effective and responsible management that protects our local water sources.
Watermains
Our 890 km of watermains deliver fresh, clean water to our community.
Sanitary sewer system
Infrastructure that collects, treats and returns wastewater to the environment.
Backflow prevention
Ensuring water quality by reducing harmful backflow into the water system.
Kitchener Utilities
Our natural gas and water utility company. Owned and operated by the city.
Trees and invasive species
Tree conservation, invasive species and our annual leaf collection program.
Environment
Policies, plans and initiatives ensuring environmental planning and stewardship.
Pollinators
Information about bees and creating a pollinator garden at home.


Title: Open new window to view https://www.kitchener.ca/en/city-services/comprehensive-review-of-the-zoning-by-law-crozby.aspx
About the review
The zoning bylaw states exactly how land can be used and where buildings or other structures can be located on a property.
The current bylaw is over 30 years old and needs to be updated to reflect our Official Plan.
The new zoning bylaw is being completed in stages. Stage 1 (non-residential zones) was approved in April 2019 following five years of work and consultation. Stage 2 (residential zones) was approved on March 21, 2022.
Stage 1 – non-residential zones
Zoning Bylaw 2019-051 (Stage 1)
Status: approved by council on April 29, 2019.
On April 29, 2019 council passed Stage 1 of the newzoning bylawfor Kitchener. Stage 1 approved the new non-residential zones and applied them to individual properties. These are now in effect. Learn more on ourzoning bylawpage.
Staff reports
DSD-19-049: Non Residential ZonesDSD 19-106: Deferred Items: Urban Growth Centre Bonusing/ZoningDSD 19-130: Deferred Items
Stage 2 - residential zones
Kitchener has more than 50,000 residential properties. We divided this stage into two parts:
stage 2a –new residential base zonesstage 2b –applying residential zones to properties
Stage 2a – residential base zones
Status: approved by council on May 17, 2021
The new residential base zones were approved by city council on May 17, 2021. The residential zones were added to zoning by-law 2019-051 and did not apply to any properties. The application of these new residential zones to specific properties is part of Stage 2b.
Read the staff reports here:
DSD-19-233: New Zoning By-law (Stage 2a) – Residential Base ZonesDSD-19-272: New Zoning By-law (Stage 2a) – Deferred Item: RES-3 Lot WidthDSD-2021-42: New Zoning By-law (Stage 2a) – Residential Base Zones
Stage 2b – applying residential zones to properties
Status: approved by council on March 21, 2022; fully in effect
Stage 2b applies the residential zones to properties and makes minor changes to the regulations of the new by-law 2019-051 to make implementation easier. The new residential zones were applied to properties on a ward-by-ward basis and were approved by council on March 21, 2022.
Review the related documents:
staff reportnotice of passingapproved zoning by-law


Title: View our Apply for a business licence page
How to apply
You can apply for a business licence:
onlinein person at City Hall (book an appointmentto plan your visit)by mail (send us an emailor visit City Hall for a paper form)by dropping off your application at the Young Street entrance to City Hall (send us an emailor visit City Hall for a paper form)
About business licences
Visit ourbusiness licences pageto learn about:
our business licensing bylawgeneral licence conditionsrenewing a business licenceother licences and permits
Processing time
Depending on the inspection requirements, the standard processing time is two to three weeks.
Adult entertainment parlour
Definition: means any premises or any part thereof where, in pursuance of a business:
goods, entertainment, or services that are designed to appeal to erotic or sexual appetites or inclinations are provided in the premises or part of the premises; orbody-rubs, including the kneading, manipulating, rubbing, massaging, touching, or stimulating by any means of a person's body, are performed, offered, or solicited in the premises or part of the preemies unless such body-rubs are performed, offered, or solicited for the purpose of medical or therapeutic treatment and are performed or offered by persons otherwise duly qualified, licensed or registered to do so under the laws of the Province of Ontario.
Review these documents:
adult entertainment parlour regulationsfee schedule
Apply for or renew a licence online
Alternative massage centre
Definition: means any premises or part thereof in which alternative massage is provide for hire or gain or respecting which a licence has been granted. However, in the case of a publicly or privately funded post-secondary institution licensed pursuant to this Chapter, an "alternative massage centre" shall mean the portion of the premises identified pursuant to Section 508.2.14 & 508.2.15 during the class times specified thereon provided alternative massage is not provided or offered outside of the specified hours or location or provided to patrons for hire or gain.
alternative massage centre regulationsfee schedule
Auctioneer
Definition: means any Person selling or putting up for sale goods, wares, merchandise, effects, or property by public Auction.
auctioneer regulationsfee schedule
Beauty salon or barber shop
Definition: means an establishment where any of the following services are provided: hair cutting, hairstyling, barber services, beauty treatments for face, hands, or feet, and including but not limited to waxing, nail services, tanning, piercing, tattooing, cosmetic tattooing, hair extensions, micro-blading, eyelash extensions, and electrolysis.
beauty salon or barber shop regulationsfee schedule
Buskers
Definition: means a Person, or a group of Persons operating together, who play, act, sing, or otherwise perform or entertain for reward or payment in or upon any highway or public place.
buskers regulationsfee schedule
Commercial Kitchen
Definition: "Commercial Kitchen" means a shared-use, commissary, or incubator kitchen that are licensed spaces where chefs, bakers, caterers and other culinary professionals can prepare their goods.
Definition: "Commercial Kitchen - Vendor" means the business that rents or operates out of a Commercial Kitchen for the purpose of preparing their goods.
commercial kitchen regulationsfee schedule
Contractors
Definition: means a Person engaged in the Business of altering, repairing, or  renovating buildings or structures, and such Business may include, but is not limited to, cleaning homes or offices, landscaping, installing fences, driveway paving, fire inspections, plumbing  or  drainage  work, or installing, leasing, or renting portable signs, but does not include a building renovator whose principle Business is the construction of new buildings or structures  and who is registered with the Tarion Warranty Corporation, or any electrician, master electrician, or electrical contractor.
contractors regulationsfee schedule
Convenience store
Definition: means a Business that is open for long hours for the convenience of shoppers and stocks, sells, or offers for sale a range of everyday items, which may include items such as newspapers, magazines, soft drinks, confectionery, meat, and milk products.
convenience store regulationsfee schedule
Driving school
Definition: means a Business that, for gain, teaches a Person or Persons to operate motor vehicles.
driving school regulationsfee schedule
Farmers’ market
Definition for Stationary Farmers' Market: means a building or place where a group of persons who operate stalls or other food premises meet to sell or offer for sale consumer products that may include, but are not limited to, farm products, baked goods, and preserved foods, and shall include permanent and seasonal flea markets.
Definition for 'Pop-up' Farmers' Market: means a short-term operation where a group of persons who operate stalls sell or offer for sale farm products, baked goods, or preserved foods for one day a week at the same location for up to 30 days in a calendar year in total.
Definition for Farmers’ Market Vendor: means a person or group of persons who operate a stall at a farmers market or flea market.
farmers' market regulationsfee schedule
Food shop
Definition: means a Business where food products intended for human consumption are made for sale, offered for sale, stored, or prepared, but does not include the selling of only bottled or canned beverages, meat in an airtight package, or pre-packaged candies other than those required to be frozen, and includes, but is not limited to, a bake shop, restaurant, or an establishment or kitchen used for the purpose of catering or preparation of food for catering.
This licence category includes restaurants, bakeries, grocery stores, coffee shops and more.
food shop regulationsfee schedule
Food truck
Definition: means a motorized vehicle, other than a motorcycle or motor-assisted bicycle, from which food products are prepared, sold or offered for sale, but does not include a Refreshment Vehicle.
food truck regulationsfee schedule
Laundrette or dry cleaner
Definition of Laundrette: means an establishment with automatic washing machines, dryers, or dry cleaning machines available for public use for a fee.
Definition of Dry Cleaner: means a Person engaged in the Business of or in the collection of clothing for the purpose of dry-cleaning, dry-dyeing, or cleaning, pressing, and spot or stain removal, or other similar applications to clothing or fabric.
laundrette or dry cleaner regulationsfee schedule
Lodging house
Definition: means a dwelling or part thereof containing one or more lodging units which lodging units or units are designed to accommodate four or more residents in total. The residents may share common areas of the dwelling other than the lodging units, and do not appear to function as a household. This shall not include a hotel, motel, group home, nursing home, hospital, or any residential care facility licensed, approved, or supervised under any general or specific Act.
lodging house regulationsfee schedule
Mobile business
Definition: means any Business that is operated from place to place offering or providing a product or service and that would be covered by one of the schedules of this By-law if the Business was operating in a building or fixed location, but shall not include any Person operating as a Contractor or Temporary Vendor.
mobile business regulationsfee schedule
Motor vehicle facility
Definition: means a building or place where a Person engages in the Business of selling, offering for sale, or providing servicing or maintenance of a Motor Vehicle and shall include without limitation any new or used Motor Vehicle Dealership, Motor Vehicle Service Station, Motor Vehicle Service Shop or Specialty Shop, Motor Vehicle Repair Shop, supplier of new and used Motor Vehicle parts, Motor Vehicle inspection Centre, Motor Vehicle rental and leasing establishment, and Motor Vehicle Specialty and Service Shops.
motor vehicle facility regulationsfee schedule
Nightclub
Definition: means an establishment or part thereof, having a principal function of the provision of pre-recorded or live music for dancing by patrons, where food and beverages may be served, and where the occupancy load is greater than 100 Persons.
nightclub regulationsfee schedule
Old gold
Definition: means a business in which any Person purchases or deals in gold or any other precious metal which is not newly minted, including old jewelry or similar articles intended to be smelted or dismantled.
old gold regulationsfee schedule
Payday loan establishment
Definition: means any premises or any part of them in respect of which a licensee within the meaning of the Payday Loans Act, 2008, S.O. 2008, c. 9 may operate a business pursuant to a licence issued under that Act.
Review thefee schedule.
Permanent vendor
Definition: means a Person who sells goods or services, at one specific location, either directly or by way of sample or catalogue for delivery later, intends to do so for 250 days in a calendar year, and is not regulated by a schedule other than the schedule respecting Permanent Vendors in this By-law.
permanent vendor regulationsfee schedule
Pet care establishment
Definition: means a Business for the grooming, training, daycare of any pet, or the overnight boarding of Animals, and shall include any Boarding Kennel or Breeding Kennel but does not include veterinary practices or the City’s Animal Services Provider.
pet care establishment regulationsfee schedule
Pet shop
Definition: means a Business that sells, has for sale, or keeps Animals including without limitation rodents, reptiles, fish, or amphibians.
pet shop regulationsfee schedule
Place of amusement
"Place of Amusement" means an arcade, axe throwing venue, billiard parlour, bowling alley, roller skating rink, ice skating rink, curling rink, miniature golf course, paintball arena, laser quest venue, pool hall, driving range, shooting gallery, dance hall, cabaret, adventure room, rock climbing facility, or any other Place of Amusement not specifically provided for herein.
place of amusement regulationsfee schedule
Pop-up shop
Definition: means a Person or Business who sells goods or services, at one specific location, for no more than 250 days in a calendar year by way of testing a location or operates as a seasonal or short-term vendor, but does not include a Person or Business selling similar goods or service for more than 250 days at the same location in the previous calendar year.
pop-up shop regulationsfee schedule
Apply for a licence online
Public hall
Definition: means a building, including a portable building or tent with a seating capacity for over 100 persons that is offered for use or used as a place of public assembly, but does not include a theatre or a building, except a tent, used solely for religious purposes.
public hall regulationsfee schedule
Refreshment vehicle
Definition: means a Vehicle selling Refreshment but shall not include a Food truck. There are three (3) classes of Refreshment Vehicles. The classes are defined below:
Class A: means a Refreshment Vehicle that is a stationary vehicle and licensed to operate at one specific location.
Class B: means a Refreshment Vehicle propelled by muscular power, from which pre-bottled beverages, or confection goods including, but not limited to, fruit, candy, ice cream, and popcorn are sold for human consumption.
Class C: means a Refreshment Vehicle that is a motorized vehicle or a trailer that is hitched to a motorized vehicle that is moved from place to place and that offers for sale only pre-packaged foods, pre-bottled beverages, or ice confectioneries for human consumption, and may include food warming equipment.
refreshment vehicle regulationsfee schedule
Special events
Definition: means a one-time or infrequent occurring event outside normal programs or activities such as any community, social, or cultural group celebration including a ceremony, street party, beer garden, festival, carnival, circus, midway, exhibition, or outdoor concert, but does not include a parade, wedding, funeral procession, picketing, trade show, or film event under permit.
special event regulationsfee schedule
Street vendor
Definition: means a stationary vehicle or vendor licensed to operate on property owned by the City in Victoria Park or at specific street intersections, and will include without limitation any hot dog cart, portrait artist, or popcorn and confection stand.
street vendor regulationsfee schedule
Temporary vendor
Definition: means a person who offers goods, wares, or merchandise for sale in any manner in the City of Kitchener, other than on a permanent basis, and operates for no more than 3 days consecutively, for a maximum of 90 days per calendar year.
temporary vendor regulationsfee schedule
Theatre
Definition: means a building in which moving pictures are shown for public entertainment and may include single screen or multiple screen Theatres.
theatre regulationsfee schedule


Title: View our Joint services with Waterloo page
Why we share services
We work with Waterloo to:
identify services we share and look at ways we can streamline them to benefit residents on both sides of our bordersmaximize the effectiveness and efficiency of our resources and service deliverydevelop and complete strategic joint initiativeslearn from our collective best practices
The joint projects we pursue align to three basic principles:
accessibility: residents in both cities must be able to understand the purpose and benefits of the projectaccountability: each project must represent the needs of both communities and clearly identify areas of responsibilityaffordability: each project must maximize cost efficiencies where possible, without sacrificing the benefits to residents
Each project must:
enhance the ability of either city to deliver or develop a service or program outside of its resourcescreate service-level improvements, while either maintaining costs or producing savings opportunitiesprovide operational and/or capital opportunitiesfeature best practices of both of our organizations
Current projects
These joint projects are underway in 2023-2024:
implement Vision Zero approaches to support the goal of zero traffic fatalities and serious injuries, while increasing safe, healthy, equitable mobility for allassess the impact of provincial legislation requiring the inclusion of affordable housing units in new residential development projects, and implement enabling policies and procedures for such zoningundertake comprehensive reviews and updates to both cities’ official plans as key enabling land use planning strategies that will guide future growth and development across the communitiescollaborate and bring consistency to sport and recreation service delivery through information sharing, understanding best practices, joint training and development, and maximizing resources
Ongoing services
We collaborate to improve service delivery in these ways:
maintenance of the 20 border streets including snow removal, general upkeep, street sweeping and leaf collectionafter-hours dispatch: Kitchener takes Waterloo's public works and facility after-hour calls and offer dispatch services to reduce costs of duplicationjoint fire dispatch: Kitchener offers dispatch services to Waterloo and Cambridge for an annual fee, this includes all infrastructure, hardware, software and mapping datamutual aid: if a major emergency occurs and the situation cannot be contained or controlled with available resources, both cities will look to one another to provide support or coverage in needed areasequipment sharing to reduce duplication and costsKitchener manufactures Waterloo's traffic signscommon platform for resident engagementcoordinated efforts and applications related to external grant opportunities from which both cities can benefitcoordinated lobbying efforts in support of two-way, all-day GO service from Toronto to Kitchener, and high-speed rail to foster a Toronto-Waterloo corridorjoint advertising campaigns to reduce cost of letting residents know about programs like snow and ice removal, Earth Week, Earth Hour and morejoint purchasing through the Cooperative Purchasing Group of Waterloo Region to achieve savings on the purchase of everything from road salt to envelopesWaterloo Region Small Business Centre is supported through the economic development functions of both citiesfirefighter recruitment: Kitchener, Waterloo, Cambridge and Guelph have streamlined the process for applications to reduce costsstaff learning and development: finding opportunities to share best practices and common staff learning programsjoint promotion of the ‘Bloom in a Box’ program, which offers a grant to homeowners toward purchase of a naturalization kit for a landscaped area to reduce stormwater runoff to municipal systemscorporate fleet training and best practice information sharingcommon Administrative Monetary Penalty System to move adjudication of parking tickets out of the provincial court systemjoint bylaw enforcement and reciprocal support arrangements for large special eventsAlert Waterloo Region, a service that sends residents important public safety messages in the event of a large-scale emergencycoordinate winter weather updates to ensure citizens receive consistent messages and give more web-based and social media communications.
Related projects
These projects rely on cooperation between Kitchener, Waterloo and other services in the region:
Kitchener Public Library removed its non-resident charge and is now part of the regional reciprocal borrowing networkboth libraries share an integrated computer system that manages core activities of the customer, circulation and collection databasesthe libraries also buy some database products jointly, and participate with other library systems to provide downloadable content (e-books, e-audio and e-video)tourism: both cities contribute to Explore Waterloo Region to provide tourism services to their respective communities


Title: View our Councillor Stephanie Stretch page
Ward 10
In Office:2024 - present
Stephanie Stretch (nee Seibert) has strong ties to Kitchener, where she was born, raised, and currently resides with her family. She is invested in the people and places of Ward 10 and feels a deep sense of connection to the community’s diverse population. Stephanie hopes her role as a City of Kitchener Councillor will help her give back to the community that has given her so much.
Stephanie holds a Bachelor of Arts in history from the University of Guelph and has over a decade of professional experience working in the not-for-profit and financial sectors serving youth, families, and traditionally marginalised peoples.
Listening to and advocating for constituents is a priority for Stephanie. She is passionate about community building, youth, affordable housing, ecological sustainability, environmental protection and expanding access to green space.
Stephanie lives in Ward 10 Downtown Kitchener with her husband, two daughters, dog "Snoopy," and in-laws.
Current committee appointments
Kitchener Downtown Business Improvement AssociationDowntown Action & Advisory CommitteeClimate Change & Environment Committee
Contact information
Coun. Stephanie Stretch
C/O Office of the Mayor and CouncilKitchener City Hall200 King St. W.Kitchener, ON N2G 4G7
Phone: 519-741-2786Fax: 519-741-2800
Email Councillor Stretch
Email city council


Title: View our King Street East page
About the review
The King Street East neighbourhood planning review includes:
the existing King Street East secondary plan area
A new boundary is proposed for the King Street East Secondary Plan. The remaining part of the King Street East secondary plan becomes part of the city’s Official Plan
We shared the following changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information
Appendix Document
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
Existing Land Use MapExisting Zoning MapExisting Zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)
Proposed secondary plan policies and land use
Proposed Secondary Plan PoliciesProposed Applicable Official Plan PoliciesProposed Land Use(Map 16 - within King Street East Secondary Plan)Proposed Land Use(Map 3 - no longer within King Street East Secondary Plan)Land Use TypologiesProposed Revised Urban Structure(Map 2)Proposed Revised Cultural Heritage Resources(Map 9a)Proposed Integrated Transportation System(Map 11)
Proposed zoning
Proposed Zoning Map(within King Street East Secondary Plan)Proposed Zoning Map(no longer within King Street East Secondary Plan)Zoning TypologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and StackingMap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions(specific to properties within Neighbourhood Planning Reviews)
Urban design guidelines
City of Kitchener Urban Design Manual - Residential Infill in Central Neighbourhoods
Previous community engagement
We held an open house to get feedback from the community on April 4, 2019. Use the links below to find information we presented at the open house:
Notice of open houseStaff presentationInformation panelsHandout


Title: View our Letter of zoning compliance page
Request a letter of compliance
To request a letter of zoning compliance:
fill out anapplication form(or prepare a detailed written request)send the form or request to planning staffby emailor send it by mail to:
Attn: Planning Division200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4V6
You can pay the application fee using the payment methods below. All payment are available in person at City Hall. To plan your visit,book an appointment online.
cheque (you can also send a cheque by mail toCity Hall)cashdebit cardcredit card (if paying by phone, please include your phone number on the form so that we can call you to arrange this payment)
If you have any questions,send us an emailor call519-741-2317.
What we include in the letter
Here is the information we will include in the letter:
Official Plandesignationcurrent zoning and if the proposed property use is compliantpending zoning, if applicablecompliance with building setback regulations, if current survey availablestatus of any building and plumbing permits on filewhether there are any active zoning or property standard violationswhether the property has any heritage significance


Title: View our Downtown Kitchener Vision page
Current vision
Downtown Kitchener (DTK) is guided by:
ourStrategic PlanMake It Kitchener 2.0Shaping DTK – A Vision for 2020updatedOfficial Plan policiesguidelines for the downtown in ourUrban Design Manual
Developing a new vision
Unprecedented growth is happening at a time when housing affordability, climate, equity and social factors are coming together to change the face of the downtown core.
As a result, it’s a great time for the community to shape a new vision for the downtown. This new vision will include a set of equity-based guiding principles for the next generation of community-led transformation.
At this time, city initiatives that a collective DTK vision would help inform include:
new land use and zoning framework for DTKCivic District master planBramm Yards master planArts and Culture StrategyDistrict Energy plan for DTKinclusionary zoning for DTKPlaces and Spaces Master Plancity-owned lands strategy (Make it Kitchener 2.0)new Official Plan
These bodies of work will work together with the Downtown Kitchener Vision to guide our future decision-making.
Downtown Community Working Group
The Downtown Community Working Group (DCWG) includes members of the downtown and broader Kitchener community, each bringing unique and diverse perspectives to the process.
The DCWG is working to:
shape a comprehensive community engagement processcraft a vision that encapsulates downtown Kitchener in 10 years, one that is premised on a “downtown for all”identify and define a set of principles that shape, direct and build context for future decision-making for the downtown core
The DCWG works with and is supported by community engagement consultants and staff. A space for input and collaboration with the broader community will be part of the community engagement process.


Title: View our Parking bylaws page
Report a problem
If a vehicle violates any of our parking bylaws, we will issue a ticket and the vehicle may be towed at its owner’s expense. Parking ticket fines can range from $20 to $300.
To report a violation of our parking bylaws, call519-741-2345.
Report a problem online
Street parking bylaws
Please do not park your vehicle:
for more than 3 consecutive hours on any city street from 6 a.m. to 11 p.m., unless signs are posted that say otherwiseon or over any sidewalk, or on a city boulevard - paved or grass, including between the sidewalk and streetin prohibited areasfacing the opposite direction to trafficon private property without the consent of the owner or occupantwithin 3 metres of a fire hydrantin a designated fire routein an accessible parking space without anaccessible parking permitclearly displayed on your dashboardfor a second time within five hours of first parking in the two-hour free parking spots downtown
Vehicles with expired licence plates or without licence plates cannot park on city streets.
The Ontario Ministry of Transportation has alist of street signson their website.
Commercial vehicle parking
Commercial vehicles that weigh more than 4,500 kg (4.6 tons) are not allowed to park on city streets.
Winter parking
Overnight parking exemptions
You can request anovernight parking exemptionto park in a legal parking spot overnight between December 1 and March 31.
You do not need an exemption to park in a legal parking spot overnight between April 1 and November 30.
Snow Events
When more than 8 cm of snow is forecast, or a Snow Event is declared, you cannot park on city streets.
During a snow event, check oursocial media pagesfor up-to-date information.
Boulevard parking
If you have a driveway with access to single family, semi-detached and street fronting townhouses, you can park on the boulevard of your driveway.
When you park on the boulevard, you must follow these regulations:
park facing the direction of trafficdo not park on the landscaped portions of the boulevarddo not access the paved part of the boulevard by driving over the landscaped portionspark fully on the paved portion of the boulevardall tires must be fully on the hard surfaceno part of the vehicle can overhang the sidewalk or the curb or road edge
When you cannot park on your boulevard
if your driveway is connected to your neighbour’s driveway, do not park your vehicle in a way that crosses the property linedo not park on the boulevard if your driveway is within 15 metres of an intersectionif you live in a school zone, you must remove your vehicle from the boulevard before 8 a.m. from Monday to Friday
Camera enforcement vehicle
Our camera enforcement vehicles scan licence plates to help us enforce parking time limits on our streets, including:
re-parking limit within the downtown corethree-hour parking time limitstopping in no stopping school zonesenforcement in surface parking lots
We store the information collected on a secure City of Kitchener server. We keep the information for the time required by the city's records retention by-law. We do not keep any information that is not related to a parking infraction. All information collected is private and confidential.
Where to park if you're doing work on your driveway
If you're doing work on your driveway and cannot park in your regular spot, call519-741-2345to ask for an exemption from our regular 3-hour on-street parking rule.
This process does not apply from December 1 to March 31.
Visit ourroad construction information pageto learn about parking when there is city work near your home.
Parking bylaw documents
Review our full parking bylaws:
Traffic and Parking BylawAccessible Parking Bylaw


Title: View our Plan of subdivision page
When you need to apply for a plan of subdivision
If you plan to build any of these types of developments, you need to set up a pre-submission consultation and apply for a plan of subdivision.
division of land into two or more parcels for sellingparcels that require the creation of a municipal streetvacant land condominium
To request a change to a land designation or to one of the Official Plan’s policies, you must submit anOfficial Plan amendmentapplication.
Pre-submission consultation
The first step to applying for a plan subdivision or vacant land condominium is apre-submission consultation meetingwith our city planners.
After your pre-submission consultation, we will ask you to complete a plan of subdivision / vacant land condominium application. The pre-submission consultation report you receive from staff will explain what reports and supporting studies are required for your project.
We may also ask you to complete applications for anOfficial Plan amendmentand/orzoning bylaw amendment.
How to apply for a plan of subdivisionFollow this process to apply for a plan of subdivision with the City of Kitchener.Internet-connected device and printer.Download our application formDownload theapplication formand complete it.Send the application via emailSend the completed application form and any attachments, including a scan of the cheque, to us via email. If your application is larger than 10 MB, pleasecontact usto arrange for a file transfer.Courier the application to City HallThe original, signed application form and cheque should be couriered as soon as possible after sending your application by email.Applications should be sent to:City of KitchenerManager of Development Review - Planning Division200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4R6
Changes to draft approved plans
To make changes to a draft approved plan of subdivision, download theapplication formand follow theapplication process on this page.
Standard template for drawings
We have developed the following standards for submitting digitally the small letter size plan drawing required for subdivision applications prior to registration:
use either the landscape or portraitstandard title block template, proportionally scaled to fit the subdivision plan drawingsubmit a legible, letter-sized hard copy of the submission contained in the provided title block using ourcolour-based (CTB) plot stylealong with the digital AutoCAD file


Title: View our Land development applications page
Planning resources
To help get you started, we offer a list ofplanning resourcesfor you to view before filling out a development application.
Development applications
Our planning team manages all applications for land development, including:
committee of adjustmentdemolition controlfence varianceheritage permitsletter of zoning complianceofficial plan amendmentpart-lot controlplan of condominiumplan of subdivisionpre-submission consultationsign permits and variancesite planszoning bylaw amendmentzoning occupancy certificate
Most development applications are now being accepted in digital format only – please see submission requirements on individual web page and application form (links above) for more details. If you are unable to submit your application electronically, pleasecontact our officeto make alternate arrangements.
Fees
Kitchener city council has approved fees for development applications and processes:
2024 planning feestheRegional Municipality of Waterlooand/orGrand River Conservation Authoritymay require extra fees for the processing of your application


Title: View our Zoning bylaw amendment page
Application types
There are three types of zoning bylaw amendments:
minor zoning bylaw amendment is required when either:a change is proposed to the zoning regulations (except for building height and Floor Space Ratio)a single new use is proposedmajor zoning bylaw amendment is required when the proposed amendment is not considered a minor zoning bylaw amendmentzoning bylaw amendment for the removal of a holding provision
Consultation
If you want to file an application for a minor or major zoning bylaw amendment, you need to request apre-submission consultationbefore you apply.
You do not need a pre-submission consultation for the removal of a holding provision.
Filing an application
Fill out theapplication formthat corresponds to your application type andsend it to our planning staff by emailalong with a scanned copy of the cheque for payment. If your application is over 10 MB,send us an emailto request access to our ShareFile account to upload your application. Then, email us to let us know that you've uploaded the application.
As soon as possible after sending us your application virtually, please send the original, signed application form and cheque (payable to the City of Kitchener) to:
Attn: Manager of Development Review200 King Street WestKitchener, ONN2G 4V6
Application forms
Download the relevant application form:
minor or major zoning bylaw amendmentsremoval of a holding provision
After you apply
After you apply for a minor or major zoning bylaw amendment:
this is a public process that involves circulating the application to members of the community, internal staff and external agencies, who will all be able to review and comment on the applicationstaff will write a staff report and make a recommendation to theplanning and strategic initiatives committeecity council will make the final decision on these applicationsthe target timeframe to process a minor or major zoning bylaw amendment is within 90 days (or 120 days when combined with an Official Plan amendment)
After you request a zoning bylaw amendment to remove a holding provision:
this process involves providing public notice of our intension to pass a bylaw to remove a holding provisionstaff will write a report and make a recommendation to our director of planning, who has been delegated authority by council to make a decision on these applications


Title: View our Strategic Plan for the Environment page
Our plan for the environment
Since 1992, our Strategic Plan for the Environment has guided our environmental initiatives. Our plan supports:
natural heritage and recreationwater resourcesair qualityland resource and growth managementenergy managementconsumption and waste managementeducation and public awareness
Natural heritage and recreation
We work to develop and maintain an ecologically diverse open space network that incorporates typical naturally occurring landscapes, significant natural features and the urban forest, all of which embody our valued natural heritage.
With our city's Official Plan in place, which identifies all of the known provincially, regionally and locally significant components that comprise our natural heritage system, as well as our Parks Strategic Plan and Multi-use Pathway and Trails Master Plan, we're in a much better position to optimize the potential for our natural heritage system and recreational areas.
Natural heritage and recreation projects
tree management and tree conservation bylawnaturalization and reforestationurban forestry and street-tree programHuron Natural AreaAudubon International certification for golf coursesKitchener Natural Areas ProgramWalter Bean Grand River Trail
Water resources
We protect our water supply by working with the Region of Waterloo and the Grand River Conservation Authority to replenish and protect our water and wetlands.
We’ve also been working on our multi-year Water Infrastructure Program to ensure our storm, sewer and drinking water systems receive the maintenance they need to consistently handle the needs of a growing city
We’ve already helped preserve our water resources through the:
Water projects
construction and restoration of Schneider Creek through Filsinger Park,environmental assessments and designs for the enhancement or restoration of Idlewood and Balzer creeksconstruction and stream restoration at Kolb Creekrestoration of Melitzer Creekhome and business visits and community workshops offered through the RAIN stormwater education programstormwater management: Audits, credits and utilityOntario's Showcasing Water Innovation Program for Beyond the Landfill: Finding Better Uses For Stormwater Pond Sedimentswater quality monitoringstream restorationsource-water protection strategy / policiesLake Erie source-water protectionOntario Clean Water ActRegion of Waterloo water resources protection and water conservationpesticide banRAIN Program3
Air quality
Over the past decade, we have successfully implemented approximately 50 new initiatives to improve our local air quality - actions recommended to us through the Citizens' Report on Air Quality in Kitchener.
We've also achieved significant milestones of the Partners for Climate Protection (PCP) program for both corporate and community greenhouse gas reduction - huge steps on our path to reducing our carbon footprint.
Our progress on air-quality improvement is monitored through the Strategic Plan for the Environment annual report card.
Air quality projects
ISO 14001 Certification for Kitchener fleet operationsCorporate Climate Action PlanCitizen's Report on Air Qualitypedestrian charterREEP Green Solutionsactive and safe routes to schoolanti-idling signage at city facilities and schools
Land resource and growth management
Our growth management strategy and growth management plan continue to help us coordinate and track development across our city.
Most new development is now planned and built in areas well served by existing or planned transit.
Over the past few years, many new mixed-use developments have been built within walking distance of public transit - including the ION network, our region's new light-rail transit system - and other amenities.
Our downtown/urban growth centre is also evolving, as we continue to exceed provincial targets for attracting new residents and businesses to our core.
Land resource and growth management projects
We will be shifting part of our focus to ensuring environmental and energy conservation is more prevalent in all new development. We continue to work with the development community to find more infill, intensification and redevelopment opportunities in our city's established areas. Other related initiatives
'Planning Around Rapid Transit Stations' (PARTS)natural heritage systemRosenberg secondary planwalkable communitiesKitchener's EDGE Programdowntown incentivesmixed-use corridor guidelines and zoningurban design manual and neighbourhood design initiative
Energy management
We work towards continual reductions in per-capita energy consumption and promote a sustainable and the increased use of renewable energy sources and new technologies.
Energy management projects
To reach our community greenhouse-gas reduction target of six (6) per cent below 2010 levels by 2020, we continue to move on actions from the Climate Action Plan for Waterloo Region: Living Smarter in 2020 report.
The first major Progress Report on this Plan was released in early 2017, revealing that our community has achieved a 5.2% reduction in greenhouse gas emissions between 2010 and 2015. Over the past few years, our community has made progress on the following initiatives for reducing energy and emissions:
community bike share systemselectric vehicles and charging networkcorporate sector reduction commitmentszero-impact sustainability incubatorwater efficiency targetconservation and demand management initiativessolar roof at Kitchener Operations FacilityPartners for Climate Protectionenergy managementCommunity Climate Action Plancommunity Energy Investment Strategycommunity access bikeshareLEED Gold Standard for city facilities over 5,332 square feetsolar-city pilot for faith institutionshome energy improvement programfleet idling protocolKitchener UtilitiesKW Hydro Energy Conservation Programs and Incentivesbike parking
Consumption and waste management
We are working to reduce resource consumption and pollution at our facilities and properties with renewable resources, monitoring programs, efficient operating practices and state-of-the-art waste management.
Consumption and waste management projects
standardizing rural and city waste programsmodifying depot drop-offsinvestigating thermal technology and garbage energy recoverywaste reduction at public eventsmunicipal leaf composting
We also support the Region of Waterloo’sgreen binand otherrecycling programs.
Education and public awareness
To promote an environmentally healthy lifestyle through the development of strategies to
increase environmental literacy; the implementation of effective monitoring programs; and the
introduction of cooperative public outreach initiatives.
Education and public awareness projects
our strategic planA Plan for a Healthy KitchenerCompass Kitchener citizens' report cardcommunity environmental improvement grantTravelWisestewardship guidelines for homeownersHuron Natural Area eventsWaterloo Wellington Children's Groundwater FestivalGreen City committeeEarth HourEarth Day community clean-ups


Title: View our Bylaw guide page
Report a problem
call us at519-741-2345to report a problemfor noise and fireworks complaints, call the Waterloo Regional Police Service at519-570-9777 (WRPS)
Illegal signs
If you see a sign that doesn't comply with oursign bylaw, you canreport it online.Report an illegal sign
Neighbourhood bylaw guide
We're updating our neighbourhood bylaw guide document. Subscribe to this page to get an email when we post an update.
Bylaws at home
Visit ourbylaws at home pageto learn about:
outdoor fireplaces and fire pitsbackyard chickensfireworks safety
Barbecues in parks
Please follow these rules if you want to use a barbecue in a city park:
only use a charcoal-based barbecue like a Hibachiclean up after you're done, including any ashes that fall from the barbecue
You can use a barbecue in any city park, except for McLennan Park and Elmsdale Park.
Noise
Our noise bylaw is in effect 24 hours a day, seven days a week. The bylaw limits excessive noise, including:
yellingloud music, radio or TVother unusual noise
City council may grant events exemption from our noise bylaws. Noise exemptions last until 11 p.m. Check thelist of approved noise exemptions.
To make a noise complaint, call the Waterloo Regional Police Services non-emergency line at 519-570-9777 (WRPS).
Fireworks
You can set off fireworks before 11 p.m. on these days:
Victoria DayCanada DayDiwali
If you want to set off fireworks on any other days, you need to apply for a permit.
You cannot set off fireworks on public property. Visit ourbylaws at home pageto find fireworks safety tips.
Zoning bylaw
We have two zoning bylaws:
Zoning bylaw 85-1 (in force and effect)Zoning bylaw 2019-051 (council approved, under appeal)
Learn about ourzoning bylawsor theComprehensive Review of the Zoning Bylaw (CRoZBy).
Fence bylaw
If your fence does not meet the requirements of ourfence bylaw, you can make an application for a variance request.
Learn more about thefence variance process.
Backyard chickens
You can keep up to four chickens in outdoor coops. Learn more on ourbackyard chickens page.
Dog licensing
The Humane Society handles dog licensing under our bylaw. Visit ourdog licensing and registration pageto learn more about the process and cost.
Parking bylaws
Visit ourparking bylaws pageto learn about:
where you can and cannot parkstreet parkingboulevard parkingsnow eventsovernight parking exemptions
If you get a parking ticket, you canpay or dispute it.
Idling
Our anti-idling bylaw says that you must turn off your vehicle after three consecutive minutes of idling, unless in traffic.
If the temperature outside a vehicle is above 27°C or below 5°C, this bylaw does not apply.
Please avoid idling and shut off your vehicle:
during pick-ups or drop-offswhile warming up your vehiclewhen waiting for someonefor personal comfort or when listening to the radiowhen parking illegally
For more information, read the fullcouncil report.
Property standards
We outline property standards to keep Kitchener safe and comfortable for all residents. These standards include:
safe structures that are free of water leaks and damageproperly maintained heating, plumbing and mechanical systemsproper ceiling heights, ventilation and potable water
Learn more on ourproperty standards page.
Snow removal
We clear snow and ice from roads, sidewalks around city-owned facilities, walkways and in parks. You are responsible for clearing snow and ice from sidewalks around your property to bare pavement.
Learn more on oursnow removal page.
Building permits
Our bylaws outline what projects you need a building permit to complete. Visit ourbuilding permits pageto learn more.
Municipal code
Review ourmunicipal codeto learn about other bylaws in Kitchener.


Title: View our Lower Doon page
About the review
We prepare Secondary Plans for newer urban areas of the city that are planned for growth and sometimes for existing neighbourhoods to help guide the growth of new development in these specific areas.
The existing policies and regulations for Lower Doon were developed over 20 years ago, with some dating back to the late 1970s. We will be developing a new Secondary Plan for Lower Doon to guide and manage growth and change in the neighbourhood. The Secondary Plan process will include opportunities for community and stakeholder input, including input from Conestoga College. We will work with a cultural heritage consultant to allow for consideration of the cultural heritage assets in Lower Doon.
Lower Doon study area map
New Secondary Plan
The new Secondary Plan will implement the recommendations from the Lower Doon Land Use Study. This will involve developing new policies and guidelines specific to Lower Doon, including:
new/updated land use designationsnew/updated zoning provisionsnew/updated urban design guidelinesidentifying a Cultural Heritage Area near Pinnacle Drive and other cultural heritage assetsother recommendations included in the Lower Doon Land Use Study
Land use study final report
The Lower Doon Land Use Study Final Report was approved by city council on March 22, 2021. The Study reviewed current issues, zoning, and land use designations and policies for the Lower Doon neighbourhood and examined its planning structure and land use mix.
Land Use Study Final ReportLand Use Study Final Report - Heritage Component
April 2022 engagement session
We hosted a virtual community engagement session on Tuesday, April 5 to share an overview of the Lower Doon Land Use Study and the next steps for developing a new Secondary Plan for Lower Doon.
You candownload the presentation shared at the session.
Open the accordions below to find answers to common questions at this session.
What work has occurred following the Lower Doon Land Use Study that was endorsed by city council in March 2021?City council endorsed the recommendations of the Lower Doon Land Use Study in March 2021. Since that time, staff started the Lower Doon Secondary Plan project, starting with the community check-in meeting held on April 5, 2022. At this meeting, staff provided an overview of the Lower Doon Land Use Study and an outline of how the Secondary Plan project would move forward with implementing the recommendations in the Land Use Study.When will the next round of community engagement be held?We'll be developing draft materials and will undertake a broad community engagement campaign in early 2023, where we will present those materials, including new and/or revised policies, regulations, guidelines, and visualizations for Lower Doon.Are you going to be working with Conestoga College as part of the Lower Doon Secondary Plan project?We will engage with Conestoga College, including the Conestoga Students association (Conestoga Students Inc.) throughout the study process.What are you doing to accommodate housing needs in Lower Doon?The Secondary Plan project will assess all forms of housing that could be accommodated in Lower Doon, as well as where different forms of housing can best be accommodated. This includes opportunities for purpose built rental accommodations. The review of existing regulations, and the creation of the new city-wide Lodging House bylaw will be created in consultation with various stakeholders and will aim to address housing needs by making licensing of lodging houses more accessible to property owners. We will be focusing on application processes, regulations, fees and inspections, while preserving the intention of the bylaw to maintain public health and safety (for neighbourhood and tenants).What are you doing about to address concerns regarding property maintenance, garbage, noise, and parking in Lower Doon?We will continue managing properties through existing city protocols, such as the property standards and maintenance protocol, as well as Kitchener Fire inspections. Going forward, our licensing services division will finalize the review and update of the city-wide Lodging House bylaw review, which may address concerns around property maintenance, and garbage for licensed properties. The review may also identify new or revised city protocols to better address issues that may arise.Will you be improving the public realm (e.g.: installing sidewalks and enhancing park space)?The Secondary Plan project will explore and identify opportunities to enhance the public realm in Lower Doon. Our sidewalk infill project is currently paused, though this project will identify opportunities for new sidewalks to be added.What is being done to preserve the mill ruins?We'll work with a heritage consultant to help with the preparation and development of heritage policies and guidelines, including a Heritage Character Area for “Upper Pinnacle Drive”. This area includes Willow Lake Park, where the mill ruins are located, and a portion of Pinnacle Drive. The Heritage Character Area may speak to the ways in which the mill ruins can be preserved.
November 2020 engagement session
We hosted two online meetings on Wednesday, November 18 to review draft recommendations for the Lower Doon area.
Engagement presentation slidesEngagement session presentation video - session 1Engagement session presentation video - session 2
September 2020 engagement session
We hosted a virtual engagement session on September 22, 2020. The workshop included a presentation, conversation and exploration of land uses in Lower Doon.
Find the presentation used at the session and recordings of the session below:
Engagement session presentation slidesEngagement session presentation video, part 1Engagement session presentation video, part 2Engagement session presentation video, part 3Engagement session presentation video, part 4What We Heard report
Phase 1 – land use study
We hired a consultant, The Planning Partnership, to lead phase 1 of this neighbourhood planning review.
This process will involve public and stakeholder engagement to review the existing and potential issues, explored desired outcomes and options and offer a recommended course of action for the next phase of work.
The result will be an issues and options report provided to committee or council in winter 2021.
Background report
This report includes background information on the work completed so far. This includes what we heard from residents and outlines options and possible next steps for the study.
Background information report
Neighbourhood engagement workshop
We received input from all landowners, residents and stakeholders in the study area to help explore the future vision, goals and preferred outcomes. Our first introductory workshop session was held on February 4, 2020 at the Doon Pioneer Park Community Centre.
If you want to review the information we shared during this session,download the workshop material.
Engagement summary report
The community feedback from one-one-one conversations with residents through December 2019 and January 2020 have been compiled along with the results of our February engagement workshop into asummary report.
Phase 2 – planning amendments
Staff will use the recommendations from the phase 1 report to move forward with formal amendments to planning documents.
This will involve:
reviewing and replacing the existing community plan, block plan(s) and zoning for the areareviewing and replacing any neighbourhood specific urban design expectations for any new developmentformally updating the cultural heritage framework
We will engage landowners, residents and stakeholders during this process.
Existing land use policies and zoning
Current Land Use MapExisting Official Plan– see Map 3 and 5 along with policies 15.D.12.16 and 26Existing Community Plan (send us an emailto download a copy of this plan)Existing Zoning mapExisting Zoning(Zoning By-law 85-1)
Cultural heritage resources
Within the Lower Doon / Conestoga College – Doon Campus area, there are several properties that are either listed or designated on our heritage register.
Map
In ourCultural Heritage Landscape Study, the Lower Doon area and Homer Watson Park were identified as areas that required further review. At the time, the evaluation for this area did not clearly meet the criteria for being a significant cultural heritage landscape but did call for more review within the area.
We hired Stantec Consulting Ltd. to do more research on the cultural heritage value of the area.
Map of Recommended Additional CHLsAdditional Research – Executive SummaryAdditional Research – Full Report
Cultural heritage resources will be part of the information considered in this project and during upcoming public/stakeholder engagement. If you have any feedback, you can use ourcomment and feedback form.


Title: View our Hidden Valley page
Implementation of the land use master plan
We're working on implementing the recommendations from the Hidden Valley Land Use Master Plan. This may involve developing new policies and guidelines specific to Hidden Valley or updates to mapping, including:
new/updated land use designationsnew/updated zoning provisionsidentifying Hidden Valley Road as a significant ‘Cultural Heritage Landscape’ or as a ‘Heritage Corridor’other aspects in the land use master plan that may assist with implementing the plan
Technical studies
In order to inform the proposed policies and land uses, these studies are underway:
environmental impact studyhealth impact assessmenttransportation and noise impact studyheritage impact assessmentwater management studiesenvironmental assessment for flood risk reductionstormwater management strategysource water protectionenvironmental assessment Upper Hidden Valley Sanitary Pumping Station and Forcemain
VisitEngage Kitchenerto learn more and get updates.
Approved land use master plan
Council approved a new land use master plan for the Hidden Valley area on June 24, 2019.
staff reportincluding proposed master plan document and stakeholder commentsfinal land use master plan
Learn about the project by downloading ourinformation sheet.
Earlier consultation
First public open house, held on June 19, 2018:
meeting invitedisplay boardsstaff presentation
The second public open house, held on November 14, 2018.
One-on-one discussions took place on these dates:
January 22 and 23, 2019February 19 and 20, 2019
We shared adraft land use master planon April 29, 2019 and accepted comments until May 21, 2019.
Next steps
VisitEngage Kitchenerto get updates on future engagement, and learn more about proposed policies and land uses that will be incorporated into the Official Plan, along with implementing zoning based on the approved land use master plan and further technical studies.


Title: View our Apply for a building permit page
Building bylaw
Thebuilding bylawoutlines what projects you need a building permit to complete.
Apply for a residential building permit
Before you start,check if you need a building permit for your project.
You can apply for a residential building permit using ouronline services tool.
To apply in person, pleasebook an appointment.
If you have any questions about residential projects,send us an emailor call 519-741-2433.
Apply for a triplex, apartment or ICI building permit
Follow these steps to start the ICI building permit process:
send us an emailwith the project address, then we will send you a ShareFile linkupload your completed permit package to the ShareFilestaff will contact you within two business days to discuss your permit application
If you need a list of the application requirements for your specific project,send us an emailwith the project address and a description of the work you want to do.
If you have any questions about applying for an ICI building permit,send us an emailor call 519-741-2312.
Permit application package
Your completed permit package will include complete and signed copies of:
permit applicationCommitment to General Review (CTGR) form and/or Schedule 1 form
Follow these guidelines for your plans and documents:
all plans must have a stamp from an architect, professional engineer or qualified designerall electronic plans and documents must be in PDF formatdo not password protect or otherwise secure your files
Organize your permit package by discipline. Examples include:
architecturalstructuralapplication formCTGR form
For your drawings, follow these guidelines:
small drawing sets (fewer than 20 pages): one PDF for all drawings, keep documents as separate fileslarge drawing sets (more than 20 pages): one PDF for each section (architectural, mechanical, application form etc.)
Designer requirements
The Ontario Building Code requires us to ensure all drawings submitted are prepared and reviewed by a qualified, registered designer, architect or professional engineer.
The following information must be included on all documents submitted to a chief building official or registered code agency:
the name and building code identification number (BCIN) of the registered firma statement that the qualified person has reviewed and taken responsibility for the design activitiesthe name and BCIN of the qualified personthe signature of the qualified person
Drawing requirements
Requirements for all drawings
be fully dimensioned - elevation and construction floor plans shall be drawn to scale: min. 1:75 or 3/16” = 1’note all sizes and types of construction materials that will be used, as well as the locations of these materialsnote finishes to all walls, ceilings and floorsall existing and proposed fire separations
Project-specific requirements
After you speak with your team, they will explain what’s needed for your project.
Common requirementssite plankey planlot grading planfloor plansfoundation plansframing plansroof plansreflected ceiling planssections and detailsbuilding elevationsstructural drawingsarchitectural drawingselectrical drawingsheating, ventilation and air conditioning drawingsplumbing drawingsfire alarm drawingstravel distance plansexit capacity planson-site sewage system design
Sprinkler drawings
Sprinkler drawings are not needed at the time of application, but they must be submitted for approval after permit issuance and prior to installation.
Alterations, renovations and additions
Your drawings must differentiate between the existing building and the proposed new work. After you speak with your team, they will explain what’s needed for your project.
Common requirementsspatial separation calculationsfire protection reportsbuilding code related reportsrecord of site condition
Processing time
When we get your application, we will review it within:
10 business days: renovation or new construction of a house where no dwelling unit is above another dwelling unit, a detached structure that serves a house and does not exceed 55 m² in building area and tents.15 business days: renovation or new construction of a building smaller than 600m² or three storeys20 business days: buildings larger than 600m²30 business days: post-disaster buildings and building classified as a high building
We appreciate your patience if processing times are longer than the times listed above.
When the review is complete, staff will email you to inform you that the permit is ready for issuance or a status letter with a list of deficiencies that you will need to address in order for the permit to be issued.
Timeframes for re-reviews will vary depending on permit application activity levels.
Online services
After you apply, you’ll use ouronline servicesto access:
the status of your permit (within two business days)permit drawings and documentsinvoicesbook inspectionsyour inspection results
Permit fees
Visit ourbuilding permit feesto find:
current permit feeshow to pay your feerebate feesdamage depositstormwater management feedevelopment charges
When we issue your permit
Login to ouronline servicesto get your permit information, then:
print the permit and post it on site, visible from the road (you can remove the permit after the final building inspection is approved)print the approved building permit drawings, full size and in colouralways have the approved plans and drawings on site for the building inspector (inspection may fail if plans are not on site)
Inspections
You canbook building inspections online. After your inspection, you can check if the inspection passed or failed and read the inspector’s notes.
Or call our inspection request line at 519-741-2761. Have your permit number ready, including your inspection codes that can be found at the bottom of your permit.
Please book your inspection(s) by 3 p.m. on the day before your inspection.
Conditional permits
A conditional permit (CP) is a permit issued under Section 8(3) of the Building Code Act at the discretion of our Chief Building Official (CBO). A CP may be issued when the applicant can show that applicable laws, including site plan approval, are forthcoming and that the approval timeframes are unreasonable and are causing unnecessary construction delays.
Find this information below:
eligibility, including when the application can be refusedlimitations of CPscostapplicationconditional permit process
Eligibility
You can apply for a CP in the cases in the accordions below.
A CP application is not a fast track to circumvent planning approvals or the time necessary for normal building code technical reviews, which ensure that public health and safety standards are being met.
Part 9 model homeSubdivision is registered or a model home agreement has been executed (see step five of theconditional permit process, submit a conditional permit application).All other casesWhere subject to site plan approval under s.41 of the Planning Act, plans or drawings have been stamped ‘endorsed’ and, approval in principle (AIP) has been issued by the Director of Planning, except for a Part 9 model home.Any necessary zoning, heritage, conservation authority or environmental permissions have been obtained and any appeal period has expired, or appeals have been resolved.If a minor variance was necessary, then the variance must be approved by the Committee of Adjustment and all appeal periods must have lapsed and/or any appeals have been fully resolved.All required applications set out in the OBC in Section 1.4.1.3. “Definition of Applicable Law” have been filed, and approvals are forthcoming.RefusalOur Chief Building Official (CBO) may refuse a CP application for any reason.We cannot issue a CP if certain planning, heritage, conservation authority or environmental approvals are not completed. Other refusal decisions may include an objection from another approval agency, where applications have only been very recently filed or when the owner has not filed all required documents.The CBO’s decision is final. There is no appeal available on CP decisions.
Limitations of CPs
A Conditional Permit (CP) allows an owner to lawfully start construction entirely at their own risk in some circumstances. A CP is different from a regular building permit in that it is limited by certain conditions imposed at the discretion of the Chief Building Official (CBO).
For example, if the required outstanding approvals are not obtained within the prescribed time period, if the conditional permit is revoked, any construction conducted thereunder must be removed and the site restored at the owner’s expense.
You must fully disclose to the CBO any information or uncertainty you have about an outstanding approval, to reduce the risk that the permit is revoked.
Cost
A Conditional Permit (CP) application must include a fee, as outlined in our building bylaw. The fee is not refundable. Before issuing the Conditional Permit, we will prepare an agreement that you must secure with a letter of credit or certified cheque in an amount specified by the Chief Building Official (CBO). The letter of credit may be drawn on to restore the site, if necessary. All other fees are payable in full, including normal building permit fees and applicable development charges.
If you do not get the outstanding approvals, including building permit(s), before the conditional permit’s expiry date, you must request to extend the conditional permit. Extensions of the conditional permit expiry date incur a fee and are subject to the approval of the CBO.
Application
To apply for a Conditional Permit (CP), you will need:
completedApplication for a Permit to Construct or Demolish formcompletedAddendum - Conditional Permitnon-refundable conditional permit fee, as defined in ourbuilding bylaw
When you have the completed forms and permit fee, send us an email.
If we approve your CP request, we will prepare an agreement setting out the terms of approval and the timeframes to obtain such approvals.
To get the CP, you must:
sign and return the Conditional Permit Agreement (sample agreement)submit a certified cheque or an irrevocable letter of credit (LOC) for the detailed cost estimate that was approved by the CBO
The securities must be from an acceptable financial institution following our investment policy and in a form approved by us (sample letter of credit) and reference the date of the Conditional Permit Agreement and the owner listed on the Conditional Permit Agreement.
The linked documents above are general samples only and are subject to change at the discretion of the CBO.
Conditional permit process
The Conditional Permit (CP) process is outlined below.
read the entire Conditional Permit Guideif the project iseligible for a CP request, submit these documents by email:written CP request that proves unreasonable delays in the construction would happen if you do not receive a CP (sample letter to the CBO)detailed cost estimate (see sample)the Chief Building Official (CBO) will review the request (timing)if the CBO does not support the request, we will let you knowif the CBO does support your request, they will consider comments from other city staff (examples: planning and engineering) or agencies for any specific conditions that need to be included in the CPbuilding staff will let you know about any or all applicable conditions of your CP (timing)if you or your authorized agent accept the conditions, proceed to step 5if you or your authorized agent do not accept the conditions, the process endssubmit a Conditional Permit Applicationand associated construction documentsbuilding staff will ask our legal staff to prepare a CP agreementlegal staff will contact the applicant when the agreement is ready to signthe owner(s) and mortgagee (if applicable) sign the agreement, provide security and return the signed agreement to legal staff as soon as possiblethe owner or authorized agent will satisfy pre-permit issuance conditions, including paying any development charges (if applicable) and outstanding legal and permit feeswhen steps eight and nine are complete, including the plan review for the building permit, we issue the CP and construction can start
Process timingSteps three and four will be completed within 15 business days.Steps six and seven will be completed within 15 business days.


Title: View our Building applications and standard forms page
Building application forms
We want to help make obtaining your building permit as efficient as possible. The first step in any building application process is to contact our team to discuss your project. This will help you understand what needs to be included in your application.
Here are the typical forms you must complete and include in your package when applying to us for a building permit:
application for a permit to construct or demolishSchedule 1 - Designer information formSchedule 2 - Sewage system installer information formcommitment to general reviews by architect and engineers
OBC matrixes
Ensure that a complete and accurate OBC matrix form is provided. A detail guide is available for each matrix to explain each section in detail.
existing buildings and part 10/11 change of use and/or performance level(see theguide for completion)new buildings(see theguide for completion)
Standard forms
When you speak to our team, they will explain any forms that may be required in addition to our permit application. Depending on your project, this could include:
alternative solution formbuilding and fire code design formdemolition agreementdemolition tracking sheetdevelopment charges information sheetEEDS prescriptive formEEDS performance and other compliance formenergy efficiency certification formflow control roof drainage declarationheat loss heat gain calculation summary sheetminor demolition agreementresidential mechanical ventilation and heating/cooling design summarySB-10 formsshoring and foundation design declarationsound transmission design declaration
For more information, please contact us at519-741-2433.
Inspection forms
You may need these forms during your building inspections:
HVAC inspection formplumbing inspection formduct-type smoke detector inspection form


Title: Homepage 
City of Kitchener
Featured Quick Links
Quick Links
Recreation and sportsFind a community centre, register for programs and camps.
Parks and trailsPark locations, dog parks, playgrounds and trails.
Pools and swimmingIndoor and outdoor pools, swimming lessons and public swimming schedule.
Council and city administrationMayor and council, city departments, data, maps and more.
ParkingDowntown and hospital-area parking, monthly permits, parking tickets and bylaws.
Jobs and volunteeringJob postings, volunteer opportunities and our workplace culture.
Arts, culture and eventsArts programs, cultural heritage, event calendar and facility rentals.
Living in KitchenerBylaws at home, life events, curbside collection and Kitchener Fire Department.
Roads and cyclingRoad closures, traffic calming, bike lanes and downtown bike repair stations.
Bylaws and enforcementNoise complaints and exemptions, pets, animals and full municipal code.
Building and renovatingBuilding permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.
Development and constructionLand use planning, active building permits, design policies and guidelines.
Business in KitchenerEconomic development, business licences, advertising and procurement of goods, services and construction.
Water and environmentStormwater, trees and environmental initiatives.
Taxes, utilities and financeProperty taxes, tax certificates, grants and incentives, utilities and budget.
Strategic plans and projectsBusiness plan, plans and project updates.
Recreation and sports
Find a community centre, register for programs and camps.
Parks and trails
Park locations, dog parks, playgrounds and trails.
Pools and swimming
Indoor and outdoor pools, swimming lessons and public swimming schedule.
Council and city administration
Mayor and council, city departments, data, maps and more.
Parking
Downtown and hospital-area parking, monthly permits, parking tickets and bylaws.
Jobs and volunteering
Job postings, volunteer opportunities and our workplace culture.
Arts, culture and events
Arts programs, cultural heritage, event calendar and facility rentals.
Living in Kitchener
Bylaws at home, life events, curbside collection and Kitchener Fire Department.
Roads and cycling
Road closures, traffic calming, bike lanes and downtown bike repair stations.
Bylaws and enforcement
Noise complaints and exemptions, pets, animals and full municipal code.
Building and renovating
Building permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.
Development and construction
Land use planning, active building permits, design policies and guidelines.
Business in Kitchener
Economic development, business licences, advertising and procurement of goods, services and construction.
Water and environment
Stormwater, trees and environmental initiatives.
Taxes, utilities and finance
Property taxes, tax certificates, grants and incentives, utilities and budget.
Strategic plans and projects
Business plan, plans and project updates.
What's happening in Kitchener
Featured event
Neighbours Day
Join us for a city-wide neighbourhood porch party! Neighbours Day brings live music to porches, driveways, front lawns, boulevards and more across Kitchener.
Upcoming events
Loading Calendar Feed...
Events calendar
See upcoming council and committee meetings


Title: View our Projects page
Quick Links
Audit and accountability fundA third-party reviewer completed reports on our fleet downtime and energy usage.
Building Kitchener TogetherA group of initiatives that will provide a significant boost to Kitchener’s housing supply.
City Hall outdoor spacesImproving infrastructure components at City Hall and surrounding streets.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.
Digital KitchenerWe're making Kitchener more digitally inclusive and innovative.
Downtown Kitchener VisionWe're working with the community to build a new vision for downtown Kitchener.
Growing TogetherThe City of Kitchener is growing, and a lot of that growth is happening in the areas around the ION LRT system.
Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC)We plan to build a new multi-purpose indoor recreation complex at RBJ Schlegel Park.
Neighbourhood planning reviewsReview of land use and planning frameworks in Kitchener neighbourhoods.
Park development and improvementsDeveloping new, or updating existing, parks, trails and natural areas.
Queen Victoria StatueExploring the history and impacts of the Queen Victoria statue in Victoria Park.
Residential intensification in established neighbourhoods studyPolicy and regulation review of developments in established communities.
Roos Island renewalRoos Island is currently closed for the completion of infrastructure upgrades and landscaping work.
Audit and accountability fund
A third-party reviewer completed reports on our fleet downtime and energy usage.
Building Kitchener Together
A group of initiatives that will provide a significant boost to Kitchener’s housing supply.
City Hall outdoor spaces
Improving infrastructure components at City Hall and surrounding streets.
Comprehensive review of zoning bylaw (CRoZBy)
Updated zoning bylaw that reflects the Official Plan's goals and objectives.
Digital Kitchener
We're making Kitchener more digitally inclusive and innovative.
Downtown Kitchener Vision
We're working with the community to build a new vision for downtown Kitchener.
Growing Together
The City of Kitchener is growing, and a lot of that growth is happening in the areas around the ION LRT system.
Kitchener Indoor Recreation Complex (KIRC)
We plan to build a new multi-purpose indoor recreation complex at RBJ Schlegel Park.
Neighbourhood planning reviews
Review of land use and planning frameworks in Kitchener neighbourhoods.
Park development and improvements
Developing new, or updating existing, parks, trails and natural areas.
Queen Victoria Statue
Exploring the history and impacts of the Queen Victoria statue in Victoria Park.
Residential intensification in established neighbourhoods study
Policy and regulation review of developments in established communities.
Roos Island renewal
Roos Island is currently closed for the completion of infrastructure upgrades and landscaping work.


Title: View our Kitchener takes bold action on housing with Growing Together plan and inclusionary zoning bylaw  page



Title: View our Sanitary and stormwater system alterations page
About this process
Under the Ministry of the Environment, Conservation and Parks (MECP), we can approve certain Environmental Compliance Approvals (ECAs) to the Consolidated Linear Infrastructure (CLI). Our CLI ECA approval process covers most alterations that meet the preauthorized MECP requirements for the entire municipal sewage collection system and stormwater management system owned and operated by the City of Kitchener.
Development projects no longer need to submit individual pipe-by-pipe MECP applications for future alterations; however, will need to make sure they:
are built followingMECP design criteriameet the requirements as defined in the CLI ECAsatisfy other provincial and municipal approved conditions
Depending on your project, you may still need toapply for an individual ECA from the MECPorsubmit an application for a CLI ECA alteration with the Region of Waterloo.
Types of alterations
There are two types of alterations related to CLI ECA applications:
sanitary (sewage) collection system: all connected sewage collection works within the City of Kitchener and owned and/or operated by the City of Kitchener including pumping stations and pipesstormwater management system: all connected stormwater management works within the City of Kitchener and owned and/or operated by the City of Kitchener, including pipes, stormwater management facilities, and Low Impact Development (LID) infrastructure
When to request an alteration
You need to request a CLI ECA alteration for the following types of projects:
changing, replacing or extending sanitary sewers and storm sewers, including extensions into new residential developmentschanges that are on city-owned property that includes parks and community centres serving a single parcel of landadding new sewage pumping stations or changing existing sewage pumping stationsadding new stormwater management facilities or changing existing facilities (examples: wet pond, infiltration basins, engineered wetlands, oil grit separators)adding new or changing existing equipment with emissions to air (examples: emergency power generators or venting for odour control) related to sanitary and storm sewers, sewage pumping stations and/or stormwater management facilities
If you have any questions if your project will need CLI ECA alteration,send us an email.
When you don’t need to request an alteration
You don’t need to apply for a CLI ECA alteration for privately owned sewage works on industrial, institutional or commercial land.
For these projects, you may still need anindividual ECA from the MECP, abuilding permitor asite alteration permit.
What you need for your application
You must include the following information in your application:
cover lettercomplete MECP formsapplication feesupporting documents
Cover letter
All cover letter submissions must include the following requirements at a minimum:
applicant information (legal name and address)agent or consultant information (name, title, and address)project Information and description (subdivision number, plan number, project name, municipal address, facility ID number, etc.)City of Kitchener planning and/or engineering contact informationidentify and list the documents included in the submission
If you are requesting both Alterations to the Sewage Collection and Stormwater Management System, you must submit separate application packages including cover letters.
Complete MECP forms
Open the accordions below to find links to the MECP forms you need for your application.
Electronic signatures are accepted and preferred.
Sewage collection system alterationsDownload and complete the applicable MECP forms:A1:Record of Future Alteration Authorized for Equipment Discharging a Contaminant of Concern to the Atmosphere from a Municipal Sewage Collection SystemSS1:Record of Future Alteration Authorized for Separate Sewers/Nominally Separate Sewers/ForcemainsSS2:Record of Future Alteration Authorized for Components of the Municipal Sewage Collection SystemPlease include this information:the City of Kitchener ECA number is 019-W601provide specific project information and indicate appropriate supporting documentationprovide verification by a Licensed Engineering Practitioner with their PEO license numberStormwater management system alterationsDownload and complete the applicable MECP forms:SW1:Record of Future Alteration Authorized for Storm Sewers/Ditches/CulvertsSW2:Record of Future Alteration Authorized for Stormwater Management FacilitiesSW3:Record of Future Alteration Authorized for Third Pipe Collection SystemsPlease include this information:the City of Kitchener ECA number is 019-S701provide specific project information and indicate appropriate supporting documentationprovide verification by a Licensed Engineering Practitioner with their PEO license number
Application fee
We collect application fees under our 2024 user fees:
sanitary (sewage) sewers (adding, changing, replacing or extending): $3,120storm sewers (adding, changing, replacing or extending): $3,120
These fees are also applicable, depending on your application:
sanitary appurtenance (examples: odour and corrosion control, etc.), including adding, changing, replacing or extending: $3,120 for each appurtenancesewage pumping station or forcemain, including adding, changing, replacing or extending: $6,240 for each facility or forcemainstorm appurtenance (examples: LID, oil grit separators, flow control, exfiltration piping etc.), including adding, modifying, replacing or extending: $3,120 for each appurtenancestormwater management facilities (examples: dry or wet pond, engineered wetlands, etc.), including adding, changing, replacing or extending: $6,240 for each facilityCLI ECA application amendment for MECP review: $1,040
Before you submit your payment, pleasesend us an emailto confirm your applicable fees.
We will begin processing your application (seereview timelines) after we receive your application fee.
Please make cheques payable to “The City of Kitchener – SSU”, quoting the site information (project name, property address, and/or owner’s name).
Supporting documents
Open the accordions below to find the files that must be included in your submission.
All submissionsAll submissions must include digital copies of the items outlined below as applicable:project design brief including existing conditions, description of proposed works, and approximate project scheduleconfirmation of previous issued ECA(s)final engineered stamped detailed drawings, typical sections plan, drainage area, grading, and profile drawingsassociated technical documents and reports (example: hydrogeological and geotechnical reports, etc.)detailed technical specifications for all proposed works (if not show on drawings)MECP Pipe Data Form (PIBS 6238e) and supporting documentationsource protection supplementary document (including mitigation measures if applicable)list of design criteria exceptions, which should include:MECP - Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers, Storm Sewers and Forcemains for Alterations Authorized under Environmental Compliance Approval, v.1.1 July 28, 2022Region of Waterloo – Design Guidelines and Supplemental Specifications for Municipal Services - February 2022City of Kitchener – Development Manual – Summer 2021operations and maintenance manual(s)inspection and testing plans including emergency response planserosion and sediment control plansidentification of public consultation on the project (include summary if applicable or rationale if not required)confirmation of Environmental Assessment Act requirementsCLI ECA Alteration Submission Checklistconsultation and clearance fromGrand River Conservation Authority(if applicable)approval or permit requirements from the City of Kitchener or Region of Waterloo (if applicable)Sewage collection system alterationsAll sewage collection system submissions must include digital copies of the items below as applicable:sanitary sewers design report, design sheets and drainage area planssewage pumping station design reporterosion and sediment control planscontingency plans for emergency and pump failure situations (if the application is for a sewage pumping station)contingency plans for possible overflows (if the application involves a forcemain or siphon)other reports, design sheets and plans as required or requestedStormwater management system alterationsAll stormwater management system submissions must include digital copies of the items below as applicable:stormwater management plans / design reportstormwater management reportsstormwater monitoring reports and plansstorm sewer design report, design sheets and drainage area plansstormwater pumping station design reportoil/grit separators design brief, calculations and manufacturers specificationsLID design brief and reportsother reports, design sheets and plans as required or requested
All reports and drawings must follow the MECP requirements (sewage,stormwater) and our standards as detailed in the site plan and subdivision application forms.
Submit your application
We require apre-submission consultationfor Full Site Plan applications, some Stamp Plan A application, and Plan of Submission applications. During the pre-submission consultant, staff will be available to discuss the requirements of sanitary and stormwater system alteration applications.
How to apply for a sanitary or stormwater system alterationAfter your pre-submission consultation, follow these steps to complete the application:Internet-connected device and printerCollect your documents and prepare your applicationReview theapplication requirementsand complete any required forms.Send the application by emailSend the completed application and any attachments, including a scan of the application fee cheque, to usby email.If your application is larger than 10 MB, pleasecontact usto arrange for a file transfer.Mail or courier the application to the Kitchener Operations FacilityThe original, signed application forms, cover letter and cheque should be couriered as soon as possible after sending your application by email or file transfer.Send applications to:City of KitchenerSanitary and Stormwater Utilities DivisionKitchener Operations Facility131 Goodrich DriveKitchener, ONN2C 1J3
After you apply
When we get your CLI ECA application, we will review it within:
20 business days
sanitary and storm sewers, including adding, changing, replacing or extending
Up to 30 business days
sanitary appurtenances (examples: odour and corrosion control, etc.), including adding, changing, replacing or extendingstorm appurtenances (examples: LID, oil grit separators, flow control, exfiltration piping etc.), including adding, changing, replacing or extending
Up to 40 business days
sewage pumping station or forcemain, including adding, changing, replacing or extendingstormwater management facilities (examples: dry/wet pond, engineer wetlands, etc.), including adding, modifying, replacing or extending
We will contact you if processing times are longer than those listed above.
Timeframes for re-reviews will vary depending on CLI ECA application activity levels.
Resources
These resources will help you through the different stages of the Alteration of CLI ECA application process.
If you have any questions,send us an email.
MECP’s Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers, Storm Sewers and Forcemains for Alterations Authorized under Environmental Compliance ApprovalCity of Kitchener Sanitary (Sewage) Collection System ECACity of Kitchener Stormwater Management System ECA


Title: View our Construction projects page
There’s a project in my neighbourhood
If you’re curious about a project in your neighbourhood:
call us at519-741-2345email the contact listed belowvisit the project'sEngage Kitchener page
Not all work on the streets listed below involve road closures.
Road and utility projects
NameExpected startExpected completionContactConway/Wayne reconstruction: River Road East to Old Chicopee Drive and Conway Drive to Kenora DriveLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.AprilJuneRob Trussler519-741-2200, ext. 7605Patricia Avenue reconstruction: Queen's Boulevard to Highland Road WestLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.AprilOctoberLicinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132Lawrence Avenue: Karn Street to Victoria StreetLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.MayOctoberRob Trussler519-741-2200, ext. 7605Delaware Avenue and Highland Road East reconstruction: Lorne Crescent to Highland Road East and Spadina Road East to Stirling Avenue SouthLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.AprilJulyEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414Sherwood/Islington/Rosemount reconstruction: Islington Avenue to Krug Street, Rosemount Drive to Sherwood Avenue and Islington Avenue to Lois StreetLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.AprilNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414Wilson Avenue: North End to Fairlawn RoadLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.April2025Eric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414East Avenue reconstruction: Frederick Street to Krug StreetLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.MayNovemberLou Slijepcevic519-741-2200, ext. 7153East Avenue watermain replacement: Cameron Street North to Eugene George WayLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.20252025Lou Slijepcevic519-741-2200, ext. 7153Admiral Road: Malborough Avenue to Farnham AvenueLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.April2025Licinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132Malborough Road: Admiral Road to Belmont Avenue West and North Drive to school propertyLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.April2025Licinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132Roxborough Avenue: Highland Road West to Farnham RoadLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.April2025Licinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132St. George Street: Benton Street to Queen Street SouthJulyNovemberLicinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132Frederick Street: Bruce Street to Victoria Street NorthLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.June2025Licinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132Ministry of Transportation work:Anne Street: Fife Avenue to expresswayBecket Street: Fife Avenue to North endFife Avenue: Becker Street to Ann StreetLearn about this project on Engage Kitchener.June2025Brent Garcia519-741-2200, ext. 7140Downtown cycling network:Duke Street between Victoria and WaterDuke Street between Frederick and CedarMayNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414Laneway programHurst Avenue to Kennedy AvenueKennedy Avenue to Courtland AvenueFall 2024Fall 2024Lou Slijepcevic519-741-2200, ext. 7153Surface constructionSouthdale Avenue from Kehl Street to Hoffman StreetCambridge Avenue from Bruce Avenue to Sherwood AvenueGreenfield Avenue from Carrol Street to Traynor AvenueTraynor Avenue from Greenfield Avenue to Connaught StreetStirling Avenue South from Mausser Avenue to Greenbrook DriveFranklin Street South from Kingsway Drive to Wilson AvenueFergus Avenue from Weber Street East to Thaler AvenueJoseph Street from Victoria Street South to endStewart Street from Park Street to endThaler Avenue from Fairway Road North to Windom RoadWindom Road from Thaler Avenue to endSouthill Drive from Windom Road to Morgan AvenueJuneNovemberLicinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132Road rehabilitation programConestoga College Boulevard from first entrance to college to Old Mill RoadBrunswick Avenue from Hartwood Avenue to Guelph StreetBankside Drive from Eastforest Trail to Fischer Hallman RoadWellington Road North from King Street West to Weber Street WestMorrison Road from Manor Drive to Grand River BoulevardQuinte Crescent from Morrison Road to Morrison RoadJasper Court from Howland Drive to end of cul-de-sacDarcy Place from Laurentian Drive to end of cul-de-sacSommerfield Place from Driftwood Drive to end of cul-de-sacArrowhead Place from Arrowhead Court to end of cul-de-sacExecutive Place from New Dundee Road to end of cul-de-sacAprilSeptemberRob Trussler519-741-2200, ext. 7605
Multi-use trail and sidewalk infill
NameExpected startExpected completionContactGage Avenue: from Belmont Avenue to Iron Horse TrailJuneNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414Highbrook Street and Block Line RoadJuneNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414College Street and Weber StreetJuneNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414Homer Watson Boulevard at Meinzinger ParkJuneNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414Mansion Street at Weber ParkJuneNovemberEric Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7414
Bridge rehabilitation
None at this time.
Sanitary network
NameExpected startExpected completionContactCarson Dr Sanitary Pumping StationongoingDecemberChris Spere519-741-2200, ext. 7412Ottawa Street Sanitary LiningTBDTBDLicinio Costa519-741-2200, ext. 7132
Future projects
Biehn Drive extension
Public information centre 1Public notices adInformation centre boardsPublic information centre 2Public notices adInformation centre boardsStudy design reportStudy design reportPublic information centre 3Letter notice


Title: View our Water and environment page
Quick Links
StormwaterEffective and responsible management that protects our local water sources.
WatermainsOur 890 km of watermains deliver fresh, clean water to our community.
Sanitary sewer systemInfrastructure that collects, treats and returns wastewater to the environment.
Backflow preventionEnsuring water quality by reducing harmful backflow into the water system.
Kitchener UtilitiesOur natural gas and water utility company. Owned and operated by the city.
Trees and invasive speciesTree conservation, invasive species and our annual leaf collection program.
EnvironmentPolicies, plans and initiatives ensuring environmental planning and stewardship.
PollinatorsInformation about bees and creating a pollinator garden at home.
Stormwater
Effective and responsible management that protects our local water sources.
Watermains
Our 890 km of watermains deliver fresh, clean water to our community.
Sanitary sewer system
Infrastructure that collects, treats and returns wastewater to the environment.
Backflow prevention
Ensuring water quality by reducing harmful backflow into the water system.
Kitchener Utilities
Our natural gas and water utility company. Owned and operated by the city.
Trees and invasive species
Tree conservation, invasive species and our annual leaf collection program.
Environment
Policies, plans and initiatives ensuring environmental planning and stewardship.
Pollinators
Information about bees and creating a pollinator garden at home.


Title: View our Councillor Dave Schnider page
Ward 2
In Office: 2014 - present
Born and raised in Kitchener, Dave attended Sheppard Public School, Sunnyside Sr. Public and Eastwood Collegiate. From there, he went to Conestoga College and earned his Broadcast Radio and Television Diploma. He’s been inducted into their Broadcast Hall of Fame and named an Alumnus of Distinction. He has also returned as a part-time instructor.
Before being elected to council, Dave’s familiar voice was heard on multiple local radio stations for 37 years. During that time, he hosted many charitable events and was part of events like The KOOL FM Poster Boy Campaign for Grand River Hospital, Stuff A Bus for the Food Bank and Tree Of Angels for the Salvation Army. He credits those years for deepening his love of this community. He currently helps at Faith FM.
The Kitchener Rangers are a big part of Dave’s life. He grew up in the Auditorium neighbourhood and spent many hours watching the Rangers practice and play. He has great memories of his Dad taking him to games and has been a season ticket holder since 1988. Dave has been the PA Announcer at Rangers games since 1995.
As a Councillor, Dave has served as Vice Chair of the Community and Infrastructure Services and Finance and Strategic Initiatives Committees. He is or has been on the Arts and Culture, Economic Development, Safe and Healthy, Affordable Housing and KW Oktoberfest Advisory Committees. He’s on The Kitchener In Bloom Committee and is a KW Art Gallery Board Member. Dave regularly attends the board meetings of the Centreville Chicopee and Stanley Park Neighbourhood Associations too.
Dave is a people person. Make sure to say hello at civic events or wherever you see him in our community. He's married to Naide who owns a restaurant in Elmira. They have three children: Chantel, Anissa and Kayden.
Dave is passionate about keeping and growing what makes Kitchener such a vibrant city to live, work and play in.
Current committee appointments
Community & Infrastructure Services Committee (Vice-Chair)Arts and Culture Advisory CommitteeEconomic Development Advisory CommitteeKitchener-Waterloo Art Gallery Board of DirectorsOktoberfest Inc. Advisory Council – Kitchener-WaterlooEnova Power Corp. (until May 31, 2025)
Contact information
Coun. Dave Schnider
C/O Office of the Mayor and CouncilKitchener City Hall200 King St. W.Kitchener, ON N2G 4G7
Phone: 519-741-3424Fax: 519-741-2800
Email Councillor Schnider
Email city council


Title: Guides
Quick Links
How to appeal a property standards complaintStep-by-step guide for appealing a property standards complaint.
How to apply for a noise exemptionStep-by-step guide for applying for a noise exemption.
How to make a property standards complaintStep-by-step guide for making a property standards complaint.
How to report a problem or make a bylaw complaintStep-by-step guide for reporting a problem or making a bylaw complaint.
How to report graffitiStep-by-step guide for reporting graffiti.
How to appeal a property standards complaint
Step-by-step guide for appealing a property standards complaint.
How to apply for a noise exemption
Step-by-step guide for applying for a noise exemption.
How to make a property standards complaint
Step-by-step guide for making a property standards complaint.
How to report a problem or make a bylaw complaint
Step-by-step guide for reporting a problem or making a bylaw complaint.
How to report graffiti
Step-by-step guide for reporting graffiti.


Title: View our Backyard pool safety page
Pool safety reminders
Drowning can take as little as 10 seconds, so it’s important to be careful when you have a backyard pool. Print off oursafety checklistto post near your pool. Review it with your family and visitors to make sure everyone is ready to be safe!
Follow these reminders when you’re swimming:
never swim alonealcohol and swimming don't mixnever swim during a thunderstormnever use the pool when you cannot see the bottom of the entire pooljump, don't dive into shallow waternever dive into an above ground poolalways walk on the pool deck, don't runswim only during daylight hours
Children
an adult should supervise children whenever they are swimming or near the poolthe supervising adult should be trained in:basic water rescuefirst aid, including how to call 911 during an emergencythe Lifesaving Society recommends a minimum of Bronze Cross and Standard First Aid training for all backyard pool supervisorsthe supervising adult should always keep children who can't swim within arm’s reachsafety equipment like life jackets or water wings can provide extra protection but should not replace adult supervision
Important pool equipment
Always keep these items near your pool:
phone and emergency phone numbersfirst-aid kitwhistle or other sound signalling devicereaching polering buoybuoy line between shallow and deep end of poolsunscreenpool chemicals stored in a secure location
Check the condition of all equipment regularly.
Take a swimming or lifesaving course
We offerswimming lessons, first aid and water rescue courses. You can register for swimming lessons at any of ourpoolsor online usingActiveNet.
For a description of each level, visit ourswimming lessons page. Level descriptions are also available inActive Kitchener.
Pool fence bylaws
If you build a pool, it needs to be enclosed with a fence. Our bylaws require that:
if your pool (in-ground, above-ground or temporary) can hold 88.9 cm (36 inches) of water or more, you must surround it with a fence that is at least 1.5 m (5 feet) tall and you mustapply for and obtain an enclosure permitall gates and doors that open into the swimming pool must:have a lockremain locked when there is not an adult supervising the poolwe recommend an extra fence around all four sides of the pool that will prevent direct access from the home as a safety measure
For more information about permits for backyard pools, call us at 519-741-2312.
Draining pools and hot tubs
Pools and hot tubs can contain harmful chemicals. Pool backwash water can pollute surface waters.
When draining your pool or hot tub, follow these guidelines:
do not drain water directly into stormwater drains or parksyou must dechlorinate pool or hot tub water before draining itlet your water sit for one or two weeks without adding chemicals, or use dechlorination tabletstest your water before draining it to ensure it follows regulationssafe discharge levels for chlorine and bromine are 0.1 mg/L or lowerdrain the water slowly on your property to lower the impact of the chemicalsif you have limited yard space, drain the water over time to reduce puddling and excess wateryou must dispose of saltwater pool water safely by hiring a hauler approved by the Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Parks to remove it from your yard


Title: View our Living in Kitchener page
Quick Links
Births and deathsLinks to provincial resources for birth and death certificates.
Bylaws at homeOur most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Commissioning documentsThe Commissioners for Taking Affidavits Act allows our City Clerk or designate to administer oaths and take affidavits.
Contact usContact information for the City of Kitchener, including phone, email and social media.
In your neighbourhoodNeighbourhood associations, neighbourhood strategy, libraries, gardens and more.
Kitchener CemeteriesVisit the Kitchener Cemeteries website to learn about their services.
Kitchener Fire DepartmentFire services, tips, careers, permits and inspections and emergency planning.
Leaves, snow and garbageLeaf collection, snow removal, garbage, recycling and yard waste collection.
Marriage and divorceLearn about getting married or divorced. Apply for a marriage licence.
Moving to KitchenerResources for moving to the City of Kitchener.
MyKitchenerSign up for MyKitchener account to create a custom dashboard.
Regional courthouseThe regional courthouse is in downtown Kitchener.
Renting in KitchenerRenting a housing unit comes with certain legal protections, as well as certain responsibilities.
Social servicesKitchener Housing, Region of Waterloo, seasonal cooling and warming centres.
How to apply for a marriage licenceStep-by-step guide for applying for a marriage licence in Kitchener.
Births and deaths
Links to provincial resources for birth and death certificates.
Bylaws at home
Our most common bylaws, including noise, parking and sidewalk clearing.
Commissioning documents
The Commissioners for Taking Affidavits Act allows our City Clerk or designate to administer oaths and take affidavits.
Contact us
Contact information for the City of Kitchener, including phone, email and social media.
In your neighbourhood
Neighbourhood associations, neighbourhood strategy, libraries, gardens and more.
Kitchener Cemeteries
Visit the Kitchener Cemeteries website to learn about their services.
Kitchener Fire Department
Fire services, tips, careers, permits and inspections and emergency planning.
Leaves, snow and garbage
Leaf collection, snow removal, garbage, recycling and yard waste collection.
Marriage and divorce
Learn about getting married or divorced. Apply for a marriage licence.
Moving to Kitchener
Resources for moving to the City of Kitchener.
MyKitchener
Sign up for MyKitchener account to create a custom dashboard.
Regional courthouse
The regional courthouse is in downtown Kitchener.
Renting in Kitchener
Renting a housing unit comes with certain legal protections, as well as certain responsibilities.
Social services
Kitchener Housing, Region of Waterloo, seasonal cooling and warming centres.
How to apply for a marriage licence
Step-by-step guide for applying for a marriage licence in Kitchener.


Title: View our Councillor Paul Singh page
Ward 6
In Office:2010 - present
Paul is a longtime resident of Kitchener and exceptionally passionate about the Ward 6 community, as this is where he grew up and bought his first home.
Prior to being elected to council, Paul served on the Economic and Development Advisory Committee from 2006 to 2008, and since his election has sat for multiple terms on this Advisory Committee. He has been a strong supporter of the city's continued efforts to make Kitchener a viable candidate for new business and economic growth, helping to improve the quality of life of Kitchener residents through prosperity.
Paul attended Forest Heights Collegiate High School and later Wilfrid Laurier University, beginning his career in the mortgage services field. As a professional in the mortgage industry for many years, he has formed a broad understanding of the diverse financial pressures the average family may experience. Paul is proud to have also built a business in real-estate management and development. As an entrepreneur, Paul has a strong grasp of budgetary matters, understanding the balance required between investing in growth, while curtailing costs.
As councillor of Ward 6, Paul continues to use his skills, knowledge and experience gained from his education, career, committee membership, and familiarity with our community to provide effective and committed leadership in order to address the distinct needs and concerns of the residents and businesses of Ward 6 and this city.
Over the past decade Paul has advocated for the improvement of many Ward 6 and city-wide services and amenities. In numerous cases, his ideas, advocacy, and motions have resulted in the initiation of several programs, events, and services, including:
Improvements to McLennan ParkImprovements to Chandler Mowat Community Centre lands and play areaIncreased programming and services support through the Chandler Mowat Community Centre to the diverse needs of the residents it servesCreation of a successful Termite Program in support of Laurentian Hills residentsPilot in Ward 6 resulting in asphalted and winter-maintained trails, leading to the inclusion and increase in this service level across the city through the Cycling and Trails Master PlanCreation of Cinema Under the Stars, an annual event bringing residents and Neighbourhood Associations together across Ward 6Collaboration with the Salvation Army Church to bring an outdoor rink and community garden to Ward 6Motion advocating that the Region better utilize photoradar in KitchenerAdvocacy for Arts and Culture and affordable housing to be included in the City’s Economic Development Strategic
For more information on Paul Singh's municipal advocacy work, visit thispage.
Current committee appointments
Planning & Strategic Initiatives Committee (Chair)Committee of RevisionCentre in the Square board of directorsActive Transportation and Trails Advisory Committee
Contact information
Coun. Paul Singh
C/O Office of the Mayor and CouncilKitchener City Hall200 King St. W.Kitchener, ON N2G 4G7
Phone: 519-741-2793Fax: 519-741-2800
Email Councillor Singh
Email city council


Title: View our K-W Hospital/Midtown page
About the review
The K-W Hospital neighbourhood planning review includes:
the existing K-W Hospital secondary plan areaan existing adjacent area in the Official Plan
We are proposing that this new area become the new Midtown Secondary Plan.
We shared the following changes and guidelines in October 2019:
proposed official plan changesproposed zoning bylaw changesurban design guidelines
Background information
Appendix document
Staff held a public meeting to get feedback from the community on December 9, 2019. No decisions were made at this meeting. We are analyzing and considering the input we got at the meeting to prepare recommendations for council.
Next steps
In response to the December 9, 2019 statutory public meeting, staff received more than 200 submissions.Staff presented these documents to the Planning and Strategic Initiatives Committee for their information on June 14, 2021. No decisions were made on these documents at this meeting.These documents include the staff report, submissions and staff responses:staff report DSD-2021-92_NPRfinal summary list of NPR submissions and responses- responses are categorized by Secondary Plan and property address, if applicablestaff responses to NPR written and verbal submissionsStaff have not yet updated the Secondary Plan mapping. This mapping will be part of the next phase of community consultation and engagement.Regional Official Plan reviewIn 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.Neighbourhood specific guidelinesBetween February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhoodThese guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.Future engagementDue to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Regional Official Plan review
In 2019 and in 2020 the Provincial Growth Plan underwent several changes, one of which now requires an upper-tier municipality, the Region of Waterloo, to define the boundaries and minimum density targets for Major Transit Station Areas (MTSAs) in their Official Plan.
TheRegion of Waterloo hasstarted the review of their Official Plan. They are reviewing and analyzing land budget needs, intensification areas across the region, Major Transit Station Area (MTSA) boundaries and more. This review will inform the development of new or updated Regional Official Plan policies.
Neighbourhood specific guidelines
Between February and May of 2019, Urban Design Planning Staff held six Design Charrettes with residents of the new Secondary Plan areas to collaboratively develop Urban Design Guidelines specific to their neighbourhood.
TheseNeighbourhood Specific Guidelineswere considered as part of the December 9, 2019 public meeting:
Cedar Hill and Schneider Creek neighbourhoodVictoria Park neighbourhoodCivic Centre neighbourhoodRockway neighbourhoodKing Street East neighbourhoodMidtown neighbourhood
These guidelines can proceed in advance of the statutory public meetings planned for 2023 and are recommended for approval and inclusion in our Urban Design Manual to guide redevelopment happening in the Secondary Plan areas in the interim.
Future engagement
Due to the changes in the Provincial Growth Plan and the Region’s Official Plan Review, the timeline for consideration of the Secondary Plans has changed, and the earliest that Official Plan and Zoning By-law Amendments, to implement the Neighbourhood Planning Review work, can be considered is early 2023.
Future consultation and engagement sessions with each of the neighbourhoods and meetings with stakeholders could start later this year and continue into 2022 so that staff will be able to hold statutory public meetings in early 2023.
Subscribe to this page to get an email with details.
Existing secondary plan land use and zoning
Existing Land Use MapExisting Zoning MapExisting Zoning (Zoning By-law 85-1)
Proposed secondary plan policies and land use
Proposed Secondary Plan PoliciesProposed Applicable Official Plan PoliciesProposed Land Use(Map 12)Land Use TypologiesProposed Revised Urban Structure(Map 2)Proposed Revised Cultural Heritage Resources(Map 9a)Proposed Integrated Transportation System(Map 11)
Proposed zoning
Proposed Zoning(Map)Zoning TypologiesSection 3 - DefinitionsSection 4 - General RegulationsSection 5 - Parking, Loading, and StackingMap of PARTS areas subject to PARTS parking ratesSection 7 - Residential (RES)Section 8 - Mixed Use (MIX)Section 9 - Commercial (COM)Section 10 - Employment (EMP)Section 11 - Institutional (INS)Section 13 - Natural Heritage (NHC)Section 14 - Existing Use Floodplain (EUF)Section 15 - Open Space and Recreation (OSR)Site Specific Provisions/Holding Provisions(specific to properties within Neighbourhood Planning Reviews)
Urban design guidelines
City of Kitchener Urban Design Manual - Residential Infill in Central Neighbourhoods
Previous community engagement
We held an open house to get feedback from the community on April 18, 2019. Use the links below to find information we presented at the open house:
Notice of open houseStaff presentationInformation panelsHandoutCultural Heritage Landscape Implementation summary


Title: Click to return to the homepage
City of Kitchener
Featured Quick Links
Quick Links
Recreation and sportsFind a community centre, register for programs and camps.
Parks and trailsPark locations, dog parks, playgrounds and trails.
Pools and swimmingIndoor and outdoor pools, swimming lessons and public swimming schedule.
Council and city administrationMayor and council, city departments, data, maps and more.
ParkingDowntown and hospital-area parking, monthly permits, parking tickets and bylaws.
Jobs and volunteeringJob postings, volunteer opportunities and our workplace culture.
Arts, culture and eventsArts programs, cultural heritage, event calendar and facility rentals.
Living in KitchenerBylaws at home, life events, curbside collection and Kitchener Fire Department.
Roads and cyclingRoad closures, traffic calming, bike lanes and downtown bike repair stations.
Bylaws and enforcementNoise complaints and exemptions, pets, animals and full municipal code.
Building and renovatingBuilding permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.
Development and constructionLand use planning, active building permits, design policies and guidelines.
Business in KitchenerEconomic development, business licences, advertising and procurement of goods, services and construction.
Water and environmentStormwater, trees and environmental initiatives.
Taxes, utilities and financeProperty taxes, tax certificates, grants and incentives, utilities and budget.
Strategic plans and projectsBusiness plan, plans and project updates.
Recreation and sports
Find a community centre, register for programs and camps.
Parks and trails
Park locations, dog parks, playgrounds and trails.
Pools and swimming
Indoor and outdoor pools, swimming lessons and public swimming schedule.
Council and city administration
Mayor and council, city departments, data, maps and more.
Parking
Downtown and hospital-area parking, monthly permits, parking tickets and bylaws.
Jobs and volunteering
Job postings, volunteer opportunities and our workplace culture.
Arts, culture and events
Arts programs, cultural heritage, event calendar and facility rentals.
Living in Kitchener
Bylaws at home, life events, curbside collection and Kitchener Fire Department.
Roads and cycling
Road closures, traffic calming, bike lanes and downtown bike repair stations.
Bylaws and enforcement
Noise complaints and exemptions, pets, animals and full municipal code.
Building and renovating
Building permits, fire permits and inspections and committee of adjustment.
Development and construction
Land use planning, active building permits, design policies and guidelines.
Business in Kitchener
Economic development, business licences, advertising and procurement of goods, services and construction.
Water and environment
Stormwater, trees and environmental initiatives.
Taxes, utilities and finance
Property taxes, tax certificates, grants and incentives, utilities and budget.
Strategic plans and projects
Business plan, plans and project updates.
What's happening in Kitchener
Featured event
Neighbours Day
Join us for a city-wide neighbourhood porch party! Neighbours Day brings live music to porches, driveways, front lawns, boulevards and more across Kitchener.
Upcoming events
Loading Calendar Feed...
Events calendar
See upcoming council and committee meetings


Title: View our Neighbours Day page
About Neighbours Day
Neighbours Day is a city-wide porch party! Local musicians will lend their unique talents by staging pop-up concerts in neighbourhoods all over Kitchener.
From porches to driveways, front lawns to boulevards, you’re invited to join in the fun by bringing your lawn chair to enjoy some live entertainment in celebration of Neighbours Day.
This is a free event, and no registration is required.
Date and time
date: Saturday, June 15, 2024time: concerts at 1 p.m., 2 p.m., 4 p.m. and 5 p.m.
Performers and locations
Check out ourinteractive mapto find performers and locations, or reference the table below.
StreetMusician or bandTimeWardActiva AvenueCraig McNair5 p.m.FiveAlbion StreetJP Sunga5 p.m.SixAlice AvenueSivle2 p.m.EightAppalachian CrescentGalt Idea Exchange Ukulele Club2 p.m.SixBaird AvenueSing Me a River1 p.m.OneBanffshire CrescentJessie T1 p.m.FiveBlair Creek DriveTHE FATHER & SON DUO5 p.m.FourBlucher StreetSandy MacDonald1 p.m.TenBlue Spruce CourtTravis Brooks5 p.m.SevenBorden Avenue NorthBrent Hagerman and the Passive Resistors2 p.m.TenBroadview AvenueDKHB Duo1 p.m.TwoCarina StreetYvonne & The Riffs2 p.m.FiveChapel Hill DriveVox Confidential1 p.m.FourCharleston PlaceMichael Kelly Cavan5 p.m.TwoCharnwood CourtAmanda Kind & James Downham4 p.m.SevenClive RoadRussell Allen Scott4 p.m.TenColebrook CourtVox Confidential4 p.m.SixCommonwealth CrescentJessie T4 p.m.FiveCountrystone DriveAnna Peveroni5 p.m.SixCovington CrescentSuburban Bicycle Gang1 p.m.SevenCumberland PlaceMr. J and the Groovy Gang1 p.m.SevenDalegrove DriveBig Shaney Tunes4 p.m.EightDane StreetTZR: Loop Artist1 p.m.TenDane StreetKW Collective Band2 p.m.TenDavid Bergey DriveAngelica Appelman4 p.m.FiveDavid StreetBoys & I1 p.m.NineDonald StreetSing Me a River4 p.m.OneDuchess AvenueSonic Uke Ensemble2 p.m.EightEast AvenueLuke Michielsen5 p.m.TenEthel StreetKW Collective Band5 p.m.OneEton DriveThe Guistini Sisters1 p.m.OneFarrier DriveSandy MacDonald4 p.m.FourFischer-Hallman RoadElg Lamont Nixon Trio5 p.m.FiveForfar CourtPAULiNE1 p.m.OneForfar CourtSammy Duke2 p.m.OneFranklin Street NorthEric Jackson & The Willow River Band2 p.m.TwoFranklin Street NorthMr. J and the Groovy Gang4 p.m.TwoGarden AvenueRowdy Ray & The Vagabond2 p.m.NineGlasgow StreetSivle5 p.m.EightGlen Avon CrescentJoshua Pascua1 p.m.SevenGlen Avon CrescentFionn Isle2 p.m.SevenGlen Lake CrescentSuburban Bicycle Gang4 p.m.SevenGolden Meadow CrescentFionn Isle5 p.m.SevenGoundry CrescentFriday Empire2 p.m.SixGruhn StreetRowdy Ray & The Vagabond5 p.m.NineHazelglen DriveBrent Hagerman and the Passive Resistors5 p.m.EightHenhoeffer CrescentCraig McNair2 p.m.FiveHett AvenueLuke Allan1 p.m.TenHighland Road EastPAULiNE4 p.m.NineHistand TrailAngelica Appelman1 p.m.FiveInge CourtCassTheHuman4 p.m.OneKingsway DriveElle Shea1 p.m.ThreeKraft AvenueClarissa Diokno5 p.m.TwoMarketa CrescentRick Andrade4 p.m.OneMeadow CrescentBen Rollo1 p.m.EightMeadowlane DriveJP Sunga2 p.m.SevenMichener CrescentEric Jackson & The Willow River Band4 p.m.TwoNathalie CourtFriday Empire5 p.m.FiveNewcastle DriveTZR: Loop Artist5 p.m.FiveOld Chicopee DriveAmanda Braam4 p.m.TwoOld Huron RoadBoys & I4 p.m.FourOlympic DriveAnat4 p.m.NineOswego CourtSammy Duke5 p.m.OneOverlea DriveTravis Brooks2 p.m.EightPandora Avenue NorthKROKA5 p.m.TenPark StreetKROKA2 p.m.NinePaulander DriveAnat1 p.m.EightPaulander DriveJaspreet Sanghera4 p.m.EightPepperwood CrescentDan Walsh1 p.m.TwoPerkell PlaceThe Guistini Sisters4 p.m.OneRed Maple PlaceNick Bordman4 p.m.SevenRipplewood CrescentNick Bordman1 p.m.EightRobert Ferrie DriveJaspreet Sanghera1 p.m.FourRockcliffe DriveTHE FATHER & SON DUO2 p.m.FiveRoseneath CrescentYvonne & The Riffs5 p.m.SixSamuel StreetLuke Michielsen2 p.m.TenSchweitzer StreetCassTheHuman1 p.m.OneSimeon StreetLuke Allan3 p.m.TenSimeon StreetAlan Charlebois5 p.m.TenSims Estate DriveElle Shea4 p.m.TwoSpringmount DriveMichael Kelly Cavan2 p.m.TwoSt Vincent StreetRussell Allen Scott1 p.m.TenSusan CourtMarc & Murray4 p.m.TwoTheresa StreetAlan Charlebois2 p.m.NineTinatawa CourtElg Lamont Nixon Trio2 p.m.TwoTyson Drive (Tyson Park)Galt Idea Exchange Ukulele Club5 p.m.OneValebrook CourtClarissa Diokno2 p.m.TwoVintage CrescentDadBand2 p.m.FourVintage CrescentDadBand5 p.m.FourVista CrescentSonic Uke Ensemble5 p.m.EightWaterford CourtAmanda Kind & James Downham1 p.m.FourWaterford CourtJoshua Pascua4 p.m.FourWellington Street NorthAnna Peveroni2 p.m.TenWestwood DriveBen Rollo4 p.m.EightWilderness DriveRick Andrade1 p.m.FiveWoodland AvenueBig Shaney Tunes1 p.m.NineWoodmans CourtDKHB Duo4 p.m.FourZellers DriveMarc & Murray1 p.m.Two
Neighbours Day 2025
Subscribe to this page to get an email when these applications open for Neighbours Day 2025:
become a musicianbecome a music ambassadorget on the map
Photo gallery
Check out some photos of past Neighbours Day events below.
Photo Gallery: Neighbours Day will appear here on the public site.


Title: View our Making a claim page
Check your insurance policy
We strongly urge you to begin by contacting your insurance company or broker. Depending on the type of property damaged, as well as your insurance policy, you may be eligible for greater compensation than you could legally recover from us or another party.
If your insurer believes we are responsible for your damage, they will seek compensation on your behalf, as stipulated in your insurance policy.
Make a claim
If you choose to make a claim against us, we must receive notification in writing. In some situations, you must place us on notice within 10 days of the incident.
Your notice of claim must include:
name, mailing address, email address and telephone number of the person making the claimcontact name, mailing address, email address and telephone number of the person submitting the claim, if different from abovedate, approximate time and exact location of the incident (address or closest intersection)brief description of the incidenttype of damage or injuryname of any contractor involved (if known)
Please send your claim to the Office of the City Clerk on the second floor ofCity Hall. You can also fax your claim to 519-741-2705.
Payment with respect to property damage or bodily injury is contingent upon the city being found legally liable for the incident.
Claim process
We will acknowledge your claim within one week of receiving the details. An investigation will then begin. We will let you know the outcome of the claim when all relevant facts are determined.
If you have questions about the claims process, please call us at 519-741-2961.
Compensation
We will only compensate when we are determined to be legally liable for the damage sustained. This approach helps to reduce financial burden for taxpayers, who bear the costs of these claims.
Fraudulent claims
Fraudulent claims cost taxpayers. We will prosecute all fraudulent claims to the full extent of the law.
Damage to city property
When a third party causes damage to city property, our risk management division seeks recovery of the related costs from the responsible party.
Potholes
Visit ourpotholes pageto find:
pothole conditionsproperty damage and road conditions information


Title: View our Roos Island renewal page
Heritage Bridge
We completed several structural assessments on the Heritage Bridge in 2023. As a result of these assessments, we’re making safety upgrades to the bridge to reinforce its structural integrity. This work will include replacing all wood stringers and the wood decking.
We worked with a third-party engineering firm to develop a design package with technical specifications for this work. We are working to get the appropriate permits and approvals for this work. We plan to post a request for proposal later in 2023, with a contractor starting the work in early 2024.
Expected completion: spring 2024
Bandstand
We completed a condition assessment on the bandstand. As a result of this assessment, we’re making improvements that will include:
providing accessible access to the bandstandexterior structure improvementselectrical and landscape upgrades
A conceptual design for the restoration is in development, and we plan to post a request for proposal later in 2023. We will request the appropriate permits and approvals over the winter.
We acknowledge the generosity of the Rotary Club of Kitchener for their $100,000 donation towards this project in celebration of their 100thanniversary.
Horticulture, turf and forestry
In 2023, our maintenance of Roos Island has included:
adding new soilgradingaerationgrass seedingflower bed and garden maintenancetree maintenance work
We will continue maintenance in spring 2024.
Reopening timeline
We plan to partially reopen the island in spring 2024, including public access to the pathway through the island, with a full reopening of the island in late spring 2024. The community will celebrate the reopening of Roos Island with an acoustic concert series in summer 2024.
Who to contact
If you have questions about the renewal project,send us an email.
Encampments
Visit ourencampments pageto learn about our approach to homelessness and encampments in Kitchener, including who to contact if you have encampment-related questions or concerns.


Title: View our Park dedication page
About park dedication
As a condition of development, we can ask developers to give a part of their land to help expand and enhance the public open space system. Where land opportunities are limited, we ask for cash-in-lieu of land to use for future parks. Section 42 of the Provincial Planning Act allows us to do this.
We ask for land or cash-in-lieu of land using ourpark dedication bylawandpark dedication policy. Our bylaw and policy describe how we apply Section 42 of the Planning Act in Kitchener. City council approved the updated park dedication bylaw and policy on August 22, 2022.
Transition
The new bylaw defines a transition period for developments already in the approval process. If a complete application was received before August 22, the park dedication requirements in the previouspark dedication bylawandpark dedication policyapply.
A complete application includes any of these:
official plan amendmentzoning bylaw amendmentsite planvacant land condominiumsubdivisionconsent
The same development must receive consent or approval from the list below before August 22, 2023 to be eligible for the transition clause:
final site plan approvaldraft plan approval for subdivisiondraft plan approval vacant land condominiumprovisional consent
Calculation
Both ourpark dedication bylawandpolicyinclude calculations for land or cash-in-lieu of land.
Our limits and conditions fall below the provincial policy maximums:
commercial or industrial development – 2% of the land areaall other development – whichever is greater:5% of the land area1 hectare per 300 residential units, when dedicating land1 hectare per 500 residential units, when dedicating cash-in-lieu of land
We use land values within the bylaw to convert land to cash-in-lieu values predictably for all developments.
Our current values are:
CategoryApplicable built form$ per hectarePer residential unit value (1 hectare per 500 units)Retail or neighbourhood commercialNot applicable$3,830,000Not applicableIndustrialNot applicable$1,853,000Not applicableEmployment or officeNot applicable$2,348,000Not applicableResidential - lotsIndividual lots, including:single detachedsemi-detachedtownhomes$36,080(per linear meter of road frontage)Not applicableResidential - low densitySubdivision, including:single detachedsemi-detachedtownhomes$2,348,000$4,696Residential - medium density (<2 FSI)cluster townhousestacked townhousequad units$3,830,000$7,660Residential - medium density, mixed use (<2 FSI)Not applicable$5,931,000$11,862Residential - high density (5-10 FSI)Not applicable$19,768,000$39,536Residential - high density (>10 FSI)Not applicable$43,243,000$86,486
Calculation examples
There are many versions of park dedication, some of which will ask for land. Our parks and cemeteries division will determine the final dedication requirements.
For reference, here are some commonly applied cash-in-lieu values:
consent applicationscommon residential severances: property frontage (l.m.) x $36,080 x 5% of land areasubdivision applicationsland, calculated at the lesser of 10 sq.m. per person or 1 hectare per 300 units (persons per unit conversions are included in the Dedication Policy)site plan applicationscommonly unit rates are applied as identified in the cash-in-lieu value chartconsult with our parks and cemeteries division for more complex developmentsofficial plan amendments or zone change applicationspark dedication is not a requirement within these application typeswe will provide calculations as preliminary estimates only
Conditions
Please review both thebylawandpolicyfor a complete list of all conditions.
Some conditions include:
all cash-in-lieu dedications are capped at $11,862 per dwelling unitall non-residential development is exempt from park dedicationaffordable housing developments will have reduced dedication requirementsland will be limited to 10% of the total site area as a condition of site plan approval (refer to policy for full statement)land will be limited to the lesser of 10 square meters per person or 1 hectare per 300 units as a condition of site plan approval or subdivision (refer to policy for residential unit conversation methods)
How to pay cash-in-lieu of park land
Park dedications are a requirement of development to be received prior to releasing building permits. We collect cash-in-lieu of park land dedications as a condition within each development process that it applies to.
Where it is a condition of development, cash-in-lieu of land dedication is received before the building permit is released.


Title: View our Planning around rapid transit (PARTS) page
PARTS timeline
PARTSPhase 1, which took place in 2013, identified our recommended station study areas by compiling background  information and developing a project plan for undertaking corridor-wide initiatives, as well as the station study area plans.
In 2014,Phase 2put the plans laid in the first phase into action, launching five corridor-wide initiatives  at once to achieve development efficiencies and lay the groundwork for the subsequent station study area plans.
We are now in Phase 3 of the project which commenced in 2015 and continues today. The status of the individual plans for the following station study areas can be found below:
Central Stations Study Area Plan(2015)Midtown Station Study Area Plan(Oct 2015- Fall 2017)Rockway Stations Study Area Plan(Oct 2015- Fall 2017)Fairway Station Study Area Plan(TBD)Block Line Station Study Area Plan(TBD)Amap of the station study areasis available.
Station area plan details
Station area plans include recommendations for:
Land useEngineering infrastructurePedestrian and cycling connection enhancementsTransportation demand management measuresPublic realm and streetscape improvements in surrounding areasRoad and parking implicationsCommunity infrastructurePublic art opportunities
Frequently asked questions
What is PARTS?Planning Around Rapid Transit Stations (PARTS) is the name for Kitchener’s station study area planning project. PARTS is comprised of two phases. The first phase occurred in 2013 and involved compiling and evaluating existing conditions and date; preparing an overall vision and goals to guide planning within the station study areas; confirming the station study areas; identifying the likely extent of work for future phases and key deliverables for each station study area plan; and developing a work program for subsequent phases.Phase 2, which will occur in 2014, will look at corridor-wide initiatives which identify work that is best suited to be conducted all at once for all of the station study areas. Corridorwide initiatives include: interim direction to guide development; development of a communications approach, Urban Design Guidelines; Sanitary Sewer Capacity Analysis, and; Transportation Demand Management. Following this work, between 2014 and 2017, the City will complete station study area plans around the 12 light rail transit stations in Kitchener and the neighbourhoods immediately surrounding them. PARTS does not include discussion on the merits of rapid transit or the location and design of the actual rapid transit alignment.How does PARTS affect me?Station study area plans have the potential to affect individuals who live, own land or run businesses within the station study areas. These plans will consider, among other things, land uses, engineering and community infrastructure, streetscapes, urban design, transportation implications and transportation demand management techniques. As light rail transit has the potential to be a major factor in the long-term growth and continued economic prosperity of our area, the potential for change in these areas is great. PARTS will help to ensure that there is a proper framework to guide growth and stability in these locations.Will there be an opportunity to comment on PARTS? How can I become involved?Through PARTS Phase 2 and subsequent station study area planning the City of Kitchener will provide a range of opportunities to get involved and comment on the work that is being undertaken. As the PARTS project moves further along, there will be a series of interactive public meetings and open houses which will allow the public to help shape the communities within the station study areas.Will the zoning regulation on my property change?The zoning regulation on your property could change as a result of the PARTS work that is being conducted. Coinciding with the PARTS work will be a comprehensive review of the Zoning By-law to commence in 2014. This review will involve updating the current zoning by-law to reflect recent changes in policies (at the Provincial and Regional level and through the City’s impending new Official Plan), reflect best practices and, provide clarity and improve readability. PARTS and the comprehensive Zoning By-law will identify whether zoning changes are needed.What is a Station Study Area Plan?A Station Study Area Plan is a comprehensive review of the station study area that ensures that future growth within these areas is appropriate, organized, and transit supportive. Potential deliverables of a Station Study Area Plan may include:Development scenarios and a preferred planLand use master planDensity targetsBuilt form plan3D Model/VisualizationsUrban design guidelinesTransportation demand managementNatural and cultural heritage resources frameworkRecommended implementation approachWhen will station study area planning start?Central (2014-2015)Midtown & Rockway (2015-2016)Fairway & Block Line (2016-2017)Sportsworld (2017+)What is a Focus Area? An Influence area? A Major Transit Station Area (MTSA)? What does it mean if my property is in one or more of these areas?Focus Areas are lands which due to their proximity to a LRT station stop require further study in the immediate term (2014-2017) to determine how they can better support the rapid transit system. These lands will be examined from a multitude of aspects including land use, connectivity, and sense of place.Influence Areas are lands within the station study area which are outside of a focus area but contribute to the role and function of a station study area. These areas, although not the focus of change, may provide opportunities for minor infilling.A Major Transit Station Area is the area formed by an 800 metre radius (10 minutes “as the crow flies”) from a LRT Station Stop.If your property is in one or more of these areas, it will be examined as part of a Station Study Area Plan.How will the City deal with development in influence and focus areas in advance of completing station study area plans?Phase 2 of PARTS will include the examination of interim-direction measures which would help guide development of land prior to the completion of station study areas plans. Possible interim-direction measures being considered in Phase 2 include:Implementing interim direction policies in Kitchener’s New Official PlanAmending the current Official Plan with new interim-direction policiesImplementing an interim-control by-law or introducing a new Holding Provision in the current Zoning By-lawImplementing general or property specific regulations and land use permissions in the Zoning By-law


