Content from 02285 fireworks bylawpdf:
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by the amending by-
laws listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of
convenience only and is not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate
reference to the By-law, certified copies should be obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
Consolidation Update: April 27, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
By-law No. 02-285
A By-law To Regulate the Sale and Use of Fireworks
OFFICE CONSOLIDATION
A By-law To Regulate the Sale and Use of Fireworks
Consolidated By-law No. 02-285
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-law No. Effective Date:
07-146 May 16, 2007 Update to section 12.1
22-093 April 27, 2022 Update to definitions, section 2 title,
subsection 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3, subsection 3.3,
subsection 5.3, subsection 6.1 and
subsection 6.5, subsection 7.1, subsection
7.2 (b), subsection 8.1, subsection 8.2,
subsection 8.6 (d), subsection 8.9 (b),
subsection 11.2 (b)
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 02-285
To Regulate the Sale and Use of
Fireworks
WHEREAS the Municipal Act authorizes the prohibition and regulation of the sale and
use of fireworks;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the former municipalities comprising the City of Hamilton
enacted diverse by-laws to prohibit and regulate the sale and setting off of fireworks
within their respective geographic areas;
AND WHEREAS it is in the interest of the people of the new City of Hamilton to
standardize the regulations and prohibitions applicable to the sale and use of fireworks.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Interpretation
1.1 In this By-law
(a) "child" means a person who is under 18 years of age;
(b) "City" means the City of Hamilton;
(c) "Chief of Police" means the Chief of Police for the City;
(d) "display fireworks" means Type F.2 high-hazard firework articles
that are classed under the Explosives Act, and the Explosives
Regulations under the Act, designed for use by professionals
holding a Fireworks Operator Certificate. These articles include but
are not limited to items such as aerial shells, cakes, roman candles,
waterfalls, lances and wheels;
(e) “Display Supervisor” means an individual possessing a valid
Fireworks Operator certificate at the level of Supervisor as issued by
the Explosives Regulatory Division (ERD) of Natural Resources
Canada (NRCan);
(f) “Explosives Act” means the Explosives Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. E-
17, as amended;
(g) “Explosives Regulations” means Explosives Regulations, 2013
(SOR/2013-211), as amended;
(h) "family fireworks" has the same meaning as “consumer fireworks”
under the Explosives Act and means Type F. 1 low-hazard
firework articles that are classed under the Explosives Act, and
the Explosives Regulations under that Act, designed for
recreational use by the public. These articles include but are not
limited to items such as roman candles, sparklers, fountains,
wheels, volcanoes, mines and snakes;
(i) "Family Fireworks Sales Permit" means a permit as issued in
accordance with section 8;
(j) "Fire Chief' means the City's Fire Chief of the Hamilton Fire
Department, or their designate;
(k) "firecracker" means a pyrotechnic device that is designed to
explode after being ignited without subsequent display or
simultaneous visible effect, but does not include paper caps
containing not more than twenty- five one-hundredths of a grain
of explosive on average per cap, devices for use with such caps,
safety flares, or marine rockets;
(l) "Fire Department" means the Hamilton Fire Department;
(m) "General Manager" means the City’s General Manager of the
Healthy and Safe Communities Department, or their designate;
(n) "magazine" means magazine as defined in the Explosives Act,
R.S.C. 1985, C. E-17;
(o) "motor vehicle" means motor vehicle as defined in the Highway
Traffic Act,_R.S.O. 1990, c. H.8;
(p) "Permit" means permission to hold a fireworks display granted by
the City issued under this By-law;
(q) "Pyrotechnics" means Type F. 3 high-hazard pyrotechnic articles
that are classed under the Explosives Act, and the Explosives
Regulations under the Act, designed for use by professionals
holding a Fireworks Operator Certificate. These articles include
items such as gerbs, mines, comets and crossettes. This class
also includes special purpose pyrotechnics manufactured live on
stage or for the film and television industry;
(r) "public display" means every setting off or other display of family
fireworks or display fireworks except for a display within the
scope of section 6.1, and for the sake of greater certainty but
without limiting the generality of the foregoing, includes any
display that is open to
(i) the general public;
(ii) persons who have purchased tickets to attend the
display or a related event; or
(iii) members of the organization sponsoring the display or a
related event;
(s) "offer for sale" includes the display of goods as an invitation to treat;
(t) "owner" means the person having effective control over or
apparent possession of property or the relevant portion thereof,
or where that person cannot be determined, the registered owner
of that property, and for the purposes of this by-law, a mortgagee-
in-possession of property, or a receiver and manager, personal
representative or trustee in bankruptcy who has taken
possession of that property shall be deemed to have effective
control over the property;
(u) "prohibited fireworks" means firecrackers, flying lanterns and
also those types of fireworks more particularly described in
Schedule "A" hereto annexed;
(v) "property" means any public or private land, building, structure or
other real property within the City;
(w) "retail sale" means a sale for the purpose of consumption or use
and not for resale;
(x) "set off' includes any method of detonating or igniting a firework;
(y) "shop" means a building or part of a building, booth, stall or place
where goods are exposed or offered for sale.
(z) "trailer" means an enclosed vehicle designed so that it may be
attached to or drawn by a motor vehicle, and intended for the
transport of goods, but does not include,
(i) such a vehicle if attached to a motor vehicle; or
(ii) a farm trailer.
1.2 In this By-law,
(a) a word importing the masculine, feminine or neuter gender only
includes members of the other genders;
(b) a word defined in or importing the singular number has the same
meaning when used in the plural number, and vice versa;
(c) a reference to any Act, bylaw, rule or regulation or to a provision
thereof shall be deemed to include a reference to any Act, bylaw,
rule or regulation or provision enacted in substitution therefor or
amendment thereof;
(d) the headings to each section are inserted for convenience of
reference only and do not form part of the By-law;
(e) words and abbreviations which have well-known technical or
trade meanings are used in the By-law in accordance with those
recognized meanings; and
(f) where an officer of the City is named, or a reference is made to an
office of the City, that reference shall be deemed to include a
reference to the designate of that person, as appointed in
accordance with policies and procedures of the City in force from
time to time.
2. Ban Against Possession or Use of Prohibited Fireworks
2.1 No person within the City shall possess, offer for sale, cause or permit
to be sold, or sell any prohibited fireworks.
2.2 No person within the City shall discharge, fire, set off or cause, or permit
to be discharged, fired or set off any prohibited fireworks.
2.3 The prohibition against the possession of firecrackers under subsection
2.1 does not apply with respect to prohibited fireworks that are within the
City solely as a result of their being in transit while being transported by
a railway, airline, trucking company or other public carrier.
3. Sale and Possession of Family Fireworks, etc.
3.1 No person shall offer for sale, cause or permit to be sold, sell or
otherwise distribute family fireworks unless the vendor has obtained a
Family Fireworks Sales Permit under this By-law and,
(a) the fireworks are included on the most recent list of authorized
explosives as published from time to time by the Explosives
Regulatory Division of the Department of Natural Resources
Canada or its successor;
(b) the fireworks are displayed in individual lots that do not exceed
25 kilograms in gross weight;
(c) the fireworks are displayed in a package, glass case or other
suitable receptacle away from inflammable goods; and
(d) the fireworks are displayed in a place where they are not
exposed to the rays of the sun or to excess heat.
3.2 No person shall offer for sale, cause or permit to be sold, or sell family
fireworks from an outdoor stand, tent, unenclosed trailer, or motor
vehicle.
3.3 No person shall offer for sale, cause or permit to be sold, or sell family
fireworks without displaying or otherwise making available to purchase, the
fireworks information outlining the safe handling or fireworks including any
information or brochures that may be required under the Explosives Act or
supplied by the manufacturer.
4. Trailer Sales
4.1 A vendor applying for a Family Fireworks Sales Permit to sell family
fireworks from a trailer shall provide to the City the written permission of
the owner of the land on which the trailer is to be parked, together with
that application.
4.2 A Family Fireworks Sales Permit granted for the sale of family fireworks
from a trailer is valid only for the sale location specified in that permit.
4.3 A person selling family fireworks sold from a trailer shall comply with the
guidelines set by the Fire Chief with respect to the sale location for
which the permit has been granted.
5. Display of Fireworks for Sale
5.1 Fireworks displayed in any shop window shall be mock samples only
that contain no explosive compound.
5.2 No person who offers for sale any family fireworks shall, at any time,
keep or permit the keeping of any family fireworks in any location in a
shop or trailer unless the location is designated and posted as a "no-
smoking" area.
5.3 No person shall offer for sale, cause or permit to be sold, or sell family
fireworks except on Victoria Day, Canada Day, and during the seven
day period immediately preceding each of those days.
5.4 No person shall offer for sale, cause or permit to be sold, or sell family
fireworks to any person who is or who appears to be under the age of
eighteen years.
5.5 No person storing family fireworks for sale shall store them except as
permitted under the Explosives Act.
6. Use of Family Fireworks
6.1 Subject to subsection 6.2, no person shall set off family fireworks except
on Victoria Day and Canada Day, or the day immediately following
either of those days if precluded by inclement weather on Victoria Day
or Canada Day, and every person shall only set off family fireworks on
those permitted days during the time period between dusk and 11:00
pm.
6.2 A person who has obtained a Permit to set off a public display of family
fireworks as provided in this section may set off such fireworks on the day
specified in that permit.
6.3 No child shall set off any fireworks, other than a sparkler where the child is
under the supervision of an adult at all times.
6.4 No parent, guardian or person standing in the place of a parent with respect
to a child shall permit that child to set off any firework, other than a sparkler
where the child is under the supervision of an adult at all times.
6.5 No person shall set off family fireworks:
(a) on or into any highway, street, lane, boulevard, roundabout, or
private roadway;
(b) on or into any land used for school purposes;
(c) on or into any park, parkette, trail, linear park, land used for storm
water management, square, other public place or any land owned
by the government of Canada or the City of Hamilton or any of their
boards or agencies; or
(d) on any land whatsoever, except on land belonging to the person
setting off the fireworks, or on other privately-owned land where the
consent of the owner has been obtained.
6.6 No person shall set off family fireworks into, inside of, or on any building,
accessory building, structure, or motor vehicle.
6.7 No person shall store, handle or set off family fireworks in an unsafe
manner, or in a manner that creates a nuisance, taking into account the
noise, danger from fire and explosion, and risk of death, injury and damage
to property inherent in the storage, handling or use of fireworks.
6.8 A person who stores fireworks shall use reasonable care to ensure that
those fireworks are not accessible to children.
6.9 No person shall hold a public display of family fireworks without a permit
issued under this By-law.
7. Display Fireworks
7.1 No person shall sell or otherwise distribute, offer for sale, cause or permit
to be sold, or possess for the purposes of sale or distribution, any display
fireworks unless,
(a) those fireworks are included on the most recent list of authorized
explosives as published from time to time by the Explosives
Regulatory Division of the Department of Natural Resources Canada
or its successor; and
(b) the fireworks are kept and maintained in a magazine licensed by the
Explosives Regulatory Division of the Department of Natural
Resources Canada or its successor.
7.2 No person shall give, offer for sale, cause or permit to be sold or sell Display
fireworks to any person unless that person,
(a) is at least eighteen years of age;
(b) holds a valid Fireworks Operator certificate at the level of Display
Supervisor, and
(c) holds a valid permit issued by the City of Hamilton,
7.3 No person shall set off display fireworks, or advertise that a public display
of either display fireworks or family fireworks is to be held within the City,
without an appropriate permit issued under section 8.
8. Permits
8.1 Any person eighteen years of age or over, who is duly authorized under the
Explosives Act and approved thereunder as a Display Supervisor, may
apply to the General Manager for a permit to set off or hold a display of
display or family type fireworks.
8.2 The Display Supervisor who is named as the applicant in an application
under this By-law shall be present in person at all times during which the
fireworks are being set up, set off and cleaned up after the conclusion of the
display or other setting off of those fireworks.
8.3 Every application for a permit under this section shall be made at least 30
days before the date scheduled for the setting off or holding of the display
of display fireworks.
8.4 Before issuing a permit under this section, the General Manager shall
obtain a report from the Chief of Police confirming that there is no record of
the applicant having been convicted of criminal offence relating to arson,
malicious mischief, malicious destruction of property, or the improper,
careless or willful misuse of fireworks or explosives, or a conviction under
this by-law or any of its predecessors, during the 10 year period
immediately preceding the date of the application.
8.5 The General Manager shall not issue a permit under this section where it is
of the opinion that the proposed site at which the fireworks are to be set off
or the display is to be held is not suitable for that purpose.
8.6 An applicant for a permit under this section shall provide, together with his
or her application,
(a) such information or consents as is required under this By-law;
(b) a fully executed Hamilton Police Services Access to Information
waiver authorizing the Chief of Police to disclose information relating
to the criminal record of the applicant to the General Manager;
(c) evidence of insurance on such terms and in such amount as the
City's Manager of Risk Management may prescribe from time to
time;
(d) proof that the applicant has been approved by the Explosives
Regulatory Division of the Department of Natural Resources
Canada as a Display Supervisor;
(e) a description of the site to be used for the setting of the display
fireworks or family fireworks, as the case may be, sufficient to
identify each site for which application is made;
(f) such further information as the General Manager may reasonably
require.
8.7 No person shall set off or hold a display of display fireworks at a date, time
location or site except,
(a) on the date and at the time and site specified in the permit; and
(b) upon full compliance with all terms and conditions applicable with
respect thereto; and
(c) where the fireworks are to be set-off on property of which the
applicant is not the owner, with the prior written permission of the
owner of that property.
8.8 A permit issued under this section may be made subject to such terms and
conditions as the General Manager may consider to be necessary in the
interests of public safety, or to minimize inconvenience to the general
public, or advisable in the circumstances or to give effect to the objects
of this By-law, and every permit holder shall comply with those terms
and conditions.
8.9 Every person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall:
(a) provide and maintain approved fully operational fire extinguishing
equipment ready for immediate use, throughout the time while
the display fireworks are being set-off or displayed, and for a
reasonable period thereafter, at the location or site of the setting
off or holding of a display of display fireworks;
(b) conform to the provisions of the current issue of the Display
Fireworks Manual as published from time to time by the
Explosives Regulatory Division of the Department of Natural
Resources Canada, or any successor publication, for the setting
off or holding of a display of display fireworks;
(c) produce the permit on demand to any police officer or any person
authorized to enforce this By-law; and
(d) permit the inspection of any site where the display fireworks may
be stored, set off or displayed, and the display fireworks
themselves together with all associated equipment, by anyone
authorized to enforce this by-law, forthwith upon demand.
8.10 Every person to whom a permit is issued under this section shall,
immediately after the conclusion of the setting off or holding of a display,
carry out a site inspection and shall
(a) remove all unused or partly used display fireworks from the site;
(b) gather together and remove all debris remaining after use or partial
use of the display fireworks, and
(c) return the site to the condition it was in prior to the setting off or
holding of the display.
8.11 The grounds on which display fireworks are set off or at which a display
of such fireworks is held shall be kept under continual surveillance, by a
person eighteen years of age or older, until the final site inspection has
been completed by permit-holder identified under section 8.10.
8.12 No person shall set off display fireworks,
(a) into, inside of, or closer than 10 meters to, any building,
accessory building or structure, or motor vehicle;
(b) within 200 meters of any premises or place where explosives,
gasoline or other highly inflammable substances are
manufactured, or stored in bulk; or
(c) within 200 meters of a hospital, nursing home, home for the aged,
church or school unless the consent of the Fire Chief and the
owner or authorized representative of that facility has been
obtained.
8.13 No person shall store, handle or set off display fireworks in an unsafe
manner, or in a manner that creates a nuisance, taking into account the
noise, danger from fire and explosion, and risk of death, injury and
damage to property inherent in the storage, handling or use of such
fireworks.
8.14 A person who stores display fireworks shall use reasonable care to
ensure that those fireworks are not accessible to children.
8.15 Except where a permit has been issued for that purpose under section
8, no person shall set off display fireworks, into, in, or on any highway,
street, lane, alley, square or other public place.
8.16 A permit issued under this By-law is not transferable.
8.17 Where fireworks cannot be set off or displayed on the date provided in
a permit, by reason of weather or some other cause that in the opinion
of the General Manager or the Fire Chief is sufficient, the Fire Chief
may direct the issue of a new permit for some other date.
8.18 Where any holder of a permit fails or refuses to comply with a term or
condition to which the permit is subject, the General Manager or the Fire
Chief shall immediately revoke the permit and shall forthwith send a written
notice of that revocation to the permit holder.
8.19 The General Manager may require an applicant for a permit under this By-
law to provide such information as the General Manager considers
necessary or advisable in his or her reasonable judgment to make an
informed decision as to whether or not to grant a permit under this By-law,
and where that information is not provided in the form and manner required
by the Fire Chief, the Fire Department may refuse to issue that permit.
9. Offences
Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is guilty of an offence,
and upon conviction, is liable to the penalties specified by Section 61 of the
Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, Chapter P.33.
10. Enforcement
10.1 The following persons are authorized to enforce this By-law:
(a) the General Manager and every authorized by- law enforcement
officer for the City; and
(b) the Fire Chief, the Chief Fire Prevention Officer, and each member
of the Fire Department designated as an Assistant to the Fire
Marshall; and
(c) every police constable.
10.2 From time to time, the General Manager may approve all such forms as
may be contemplated under this By-law, including forms of permit and
applications for permit, and an applicant for any permit under this By-law
shall use the appropriate form of application and provide all information
required thereon.
11. Pyrotechnics
11.1 No person, other than a person who holds a current and appropriate level
of certificate for the type, size, number and location of the pyrotechnic
materials in question for the type of pyrotechnic materials being used, shall
(a) have in his or her custody or control, any pyrotechnic materials,
unless that person is,
(i) a manufacturer, wholesaler or retailer of such materials who
holds all requisite licenses to act in that capacity, and the
materials in question are in that person's custody solely in
connection with that business; or
(ii) lawfully carrying the pyrotechnic materials in transit through
the City, whether as a public carrier or as an employee of a
person described in sub-clause (i); or
(b) perform or carry out any pyrotechnic display, special effects, event,
exhibition or operation.
11.2 Every pyrotechnic display, special effects, event, exhibition or operation
carried out in the City shall be performed or carried out safely, in
accordance with
(a) prevailing best practice in the pyrotechnic trade, and
(b) the specifications, recommendations or requirements, as the case
may be, set down in the Special Effects Pyrotechnic Manual as
issued and updated from time to time by the Explosives Regulatory
Division of the Department of Natural Resources Canada.
11.3 For the purposes of this section, "certificate" means a current certificate
issued by or under the authority of Natural Resources Canada.
12. Miscellaneous
12.1 The following By-laws regulating the sale and display of fireworks and usage
of pyrotechnics are repealed:
(a) By-law No. 79-128, of the former City of Hamilton;
(b) By-law No. 90-198 of the former City of Hamilton;
(c) By-law No. 3811-93 of the former City of Stoney Creek;
(d) By-law No. 95-30 of the former Town of Ancaster,
(e) By-law No. 4166-94, passed by the Corporation of the Town of
Dundas, namely “A By-law to Regulate the Sale and Use of
Fireworks”,
and all amendments thereto.
12.2 This by-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
12.3 This by-law may be cited as the Fireworks By-law.
PASSED and ENACTED this 9th day of October, 2002 .
SCHEDULE "A"
Prohibited Fireworks
COMMODITY DESCRIPTION
Cigarette loads or plugs Small explosive charges designed for insertion in cigarettes or
cigars which will cause them to explode after the victim takes a
few pulls.
Exploding matches Resemble ordinary book matches and are designed to explode
after a certain delay, usually about the time they are in position
to light a cigarette.
Sparkling matches Also resemble the normal book matches but send out a shower
of sparks.
Ammunition for A violent type of blank ammunition made up for use as a
miniature tie clip, novelty.
cufflink or key chain
pistols
Auto alarms or jokers Supposedly designed as burglar alarms but are really for a
practical joke; when wired to the ignition system of a car they
operate with a loud screeching whistle followed by copious
emission of smoke and a loud explosion.
"Cherry" bombs, M- 80 Very violent firecrackers which annually cause serious injuries;
and silver salutes and they are considered far too violent and contain an excessive
flash crackers charge of a prohibited fireworks composition.
Throw-down and step- Small objects explode on impact; some of the latter are so
on torpedoes, and shaped and coloured as to look like children's breakfast cereal
cracking balls or candy balls.
Exploding golf balls Designed to explode and emits a cloud of smoke on impact.
Stink bombs and Often made to resemble cherry bombs and salutes; are used for
smoke bombs practical jokes (also prohibited from importation under
Memorandum D33- 1 Importation of Offensive Weapons).
Tear gas pens and Resemble a pen, may contain a mechanism activated by an
launchers explosive, and are supposedly for protection against muggers,
but are more commonly used as offensive weapons or as
practical jokes (also prohibited under Memorandum D33- 1).
Party poppers and table Designed to project paper streamers or dispense party favours.
bombs The smaller ones are made of coloured plastic, shaped like
champagne bottles.
Table rockets and Small fireworks designed to be launched from a table or a bottle
bottle skyrockets and bursting in a shower of sparks or a cloud of smoke.
Fake firecrackers and Any article which employs or stimulates an explosive or a
other trick devices or pyrotechnic for a trick or a joke.
practical jokes



Content from 03209 to amend parks bylaw 01219pdf:
Authority: Item 6, Committee of the Whole
Report 03-020
CM: July 23,2003
Bill No. 209
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 03- 209
To Amend City of Hamilton By-Law No. 01-219
WHEREAS Section 11 of the Municipal Act, 2001, as amended, provides that a
single-tier municipality may pass by-laws respecting matters within its sphere of
jurisdiction;
AND WHEREAS the matters herein referred are within the sphere of jurisdiction of the
City of Hamilton;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. City of Hamilton By-Law No. 01-219 shall be amended as follows:
(a) Section 1 (i) shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
1. (i) "Director" means the Director or Acting Director of Operations and
Maintenance for the City and includes his designate and successor or the
Director or Acting Director of any other City project on lands referred to in
ss. I( r) of City of Hamilton By-Law No. 01-219 as amended.
(b) Section 1 shall be amended by adding the following to Section 1 (r):
For greater certainty, the provisions of By-Law No. 01-219, as amended,
shall be deemed to apply to all open space lands, including road
allowances shown on a registered plan of subdivision, required for the Red
Hill Valley Project, until such time as the City declares otherwise.
(d) Section 51 shall be deleted and replaced with the following:
51. A Director is authorized for such temporary period or periods as
the Director deems appropriate to close off or restrict access to any land or
part or parts thereof referred to in ss. 1 (r) of By-Law No. 01-219 as
amended to provide for or permit construction of works or undertakings in,
on or through such lands as well as to provide for repairs, restoration,
reconstruction or other remedial action with respect to parks, grounds or
structures thereon.
(f) Section 53 shall be amended to add ss. 53(6) as follows:
53(6) In addition to those persons referred to in ss. 53 (1) to (3), an
agent of the City, or a contractor or subcontractor of the City, and their
agents, if designated by a Director, is authorized to carry out the
functions described in those subsections.
PASSED and ENACTED this 23rd day of July, 2003.



Content from 03272 sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylawpdf:
Authority: Item Hearings Sub-Committee
Report03-031
(a))
CM: September24,2003
BillNo.
OF HAMILTON
BY-LAWNO.
To Impose Fees and Charges Respecting the Use ofthe Cityof Hamilton
Sanitary Sewage System and to ImplementaWastewaterAbatement Program
WHEREAS pursuantto Section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, as amended, the City
of Hamilton may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on any class of personsfor
services or activities provided or done by or On behalfof it;
AND WHEREAS By-law No. 2-75 was passed and enacted by the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth on January 21, 1975, being a by-law to impose
and collect a sanitary surcharge on the water rate to cover the cost of the
establishment, construction, maintenance, operation and financing of the sanitary
sewage system of the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, and has
beenamended on numerous occasions;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting on December 11, 2002, the Council of the City of
Hamilton approved of Item 7 of Hearings Sub-Committee Report 02-040 and thereby
authorized a wastewater abatement program commencing on January 1, 2003;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting of September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of
Hamilton approved of Item 1 of Hearings Subcommittee Report 03-031 and thereby
authorized this consolidated by-law to impose fees and charges consisting of a
sanitary surcharge on the water rate, and to thereby repeal By-law No. 2-75, as
amended, as well as to implement the wastewater abatement program and impose
administrationfees and charges related to the wastewater abatement program;
2
AND WHEREAS a public meeting was held on September 24, 2003 and prior to the
passing of this by-law, in accordance with the provisions of Ontario Regulation
madeunderthe MunicipalAct, 2001.
NOWTHEREFOREthe Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Definitions
Inthis By-law,
“Abatement” means a credit on the Sanitary Surcharge amount paid by
the Consumer, as approved by the City underthe wastewater abatement
program described in this By-law;
“Annual Administration Fee” has the meaning assigned in sub-section
of this By-law;
“Application” has the meaning assigned in section ofthis By-law;
‘City” meansthe City of Hamilton;
“combined sewer‘’means a sewer intendedtofunction simultaneously as
a storm sewer and a sanitary sewer;
“Commercial” means of or pertaining to retail and wholesale sales of
manufactured goods and/or services;
“Consumer” means either a Commercial or Industrial ratepayer who is
responsible under the Waterworks By-law and this By-law for paying
and charges respecting water supplied by the City of Hamilton and
wastewater services provided by the City of Hamilton;
“Director” shall mean the Director of Water and Wastewater, Public
Works Department, for the City of Hamilton,the person duly authorized
to act in hisor her stead, or his or hersuccessor;
3
“General Manager of Corporate Services” means the General Manager
of the Corporate Services Department for the City of Hamilton, the
person duly authorized to act in his or her stead, or hisor hersuccessor;
“General Manager of Public Works” means the General Manager of the
Public Works Department for the City of Hamilton, the person duly
authorized to act in hisor her stead, or his or her successor;
(k) “Industrial” means of or pertaining to the manufacturing, producing or
processing of anything, or the research or development in connection
with the manufacturing, producing or processing of anything;
(I) “Initial Application Processing Fee” has the meaning assigned in section
of this By-law;
(m) “sanitary sewage system” means,
(i) the buildings, structures, plant, machinery, equipment,
appurtenances, devices, cond ui ts, outlets, underground pipelines
and installations, and other works designated for the collection
and treatment of sanitary sewage by the City, and
(ii) includes lands appropriated for such purposes and uses;
(n) “sanitary sewage works’’means,
(i) all sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer systems, pumping stations,
sewage treatment plants, and
(ii) includes combined sewers, sanitary private drains and other
works for the collection, acceptance, transmission, treatment and
disposal of sanitary sewage;
4
“Sanitary Surcharge” means a charge payable by owners or occupants
of lands who are connected to the sanitary sewage systems of the City in
respect of the following matters:
(i) the cost of the operation and maintenance of the sanitary sewage
works and includes a charge for deferred maintenance or a
reserve fund for any purpose; and
the capital cost of sanitary sewage works which includes debt
charges but does not include,
1. any existing frontage and connection charges imposed upon
the owners or occupants of lands, other than the City, under
any provision of any other City by-law, and
2. the cost of new local sanitary sewers up to and including
diameter, and of private drains which are to be charged
against the owners or occupants of lands, other than the City,
under any provision any other City by-law;
(p) “Sewer Use means By-law R89-049 of the City of Hamilton, as
amended or replaced from time to time;
“Supplementary Application Fee’’ has the meaning assigned in section
11of this By-law;
(r) “water rate” means the fees and charges established by the City of
Hamilton under By-law R84-026, as amended or replaced from time to
time; and
(s) “Waterworks By-law” means By-law R84-026 of the City of Hamilton, as
amended or replaced from time to time.
5
Administration and Enforcement of Fees and Charges
2. (a) The General Manager of Corporate Services, or any other body acting
on behalf of the General Manager of Corporate Services under an
agreement with the City of Hamilton, is responsible, except as otherwise
provided in this By-law, for the billing and collection of the fees and
charges imposed under the provisions of this By-law.
The Director is to furnish to the General Manager of Corporate Services
quarter-yearly in January, April, July and October, not later than the
day of each of the said months, with a list of all streets and parts of
streets and other places where yard sewers and private drains have
been connected to a City sanitary sewer or combined sewer during the
immediately preceding three (3) calendar months.
San ita Su rcha
3. The owners and occupants of all lands within the geographic area of the City
who are connected to the sanitary sewage systems of the City are to pay
fees and charges in accordance with the provisions of this By-law, consisting of
a Sanitary Surcharge, based onthe percentage of the water rates of the Cityas
set forth inSchedule “A”to this By-law.
Liabilityfor Surcharge based Non-Metered Water Rates
4. Where there is a non-metered water rate imposed by the Waterworks By-law
for the whole or any part of the City, then the Sanitary Surcharge shall be
calculated based on the percentage as set forth in Schedule to this By-law,
of that non-metered water rate whether that rate is derived from an assessment
base or isa flat rate.
6
Liabilitv for surcharge Based on Metered Water Rates
Where there is a metered water rate imposed bythe Waterworks By-law
for thewhole or any part of the City, then the Sanitary Surcharge shall be
calculated based on the percentage as set forth in Schedule “Ato this
By-law, of that metered water rate.
The Sanitary Surcharge determined under section 4 and sub-section
of this By-lawisto be added tothe same bills sent to an owner and/
or occupant of lands for metered or non-metered water, as applicable,
underthe Waterworks By-law.
Where a water meter fails to record properly, or where the meter-reader
is unable to obtain a reading, the person or persons liable to pay the
Sanitary Surcharge based on meteredwater rates are liable to pay such
Sanitary Surcharge on the water rate for an amount of water estimated
on the basis of a corresponding period in the immediately preceding
year, or, where the water user did not occupy the same property for the
same period during the corresponding period in the previous year, then
such person or persons are liable to pay such Sanitary Surcharge on the
water rate for an amount of water based on a similar period of the
current year, or, where that is not applicable,then the person or persons
are liable for such Sanitary Surcharge based on the applicable minimum
charge for water imposed by the City under the Waterworks By-law.
Should the General Manager of Corporate Services, or any other body
acting on behalf of the General Manager of Corporate Services under an
agreement with the City of Hamilton, subsequently receive the water
meter data on the amount of water actually supplied to the property by
the City, the amount billed to such person or persons will be
subsequently adjusted to reflect the actual amount of water supplied to
the property and the person or persons shall be liable for the resulting
adjusted Sanitary Surcharge.
7
Unpaid Accounts
6. Effective October 2, 2002, late payment charges for any overdue Sanitary
Surcharge accounts will be at the rate of 1.5% per month calculated daily on
any overdue balance.
7. Where an account for the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered or
metered water rates remains unpaid
(a) seven (7) calendar days after the due date set forth on the bill for the
Sanitary Surcharge, a notice of non-payment is to be sent by the
Manager of Corporate Services, or any other body acting on
behalf of the Managerof Corporate Services under an agree-
mentwith the City of Hamilton, by ordinary prepaid mail, and
(b) twenty-eight (28) calendar days after the due date set forth on the bill for
the Sanitary Surcharge, a final verbal notice is to be given by the
General Manager of Corporate Services, or any other body acting on
behalf of the General Manager of Corporate Services under an
agreement with the City of Hamilton, advising that if the account
continues unpaid for ninety (90) calendar days after the due date
set forth on the bill the Sanitary Surcharge,
(i) the water may be turned off as set forth insub-section 8 (a) of this
By-law,or
the arrears may be collected by a distress as set forth in sub-
section 8 (b) of this By-law,or
(iii) the arrears may be added to the tax roll for the property
connected to the sanitary sewage systems of the City and
collected in the same manner as municipal taxes as set forth in
sub-section of this By-law.
8
8. Where an account for the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered or
metered water rates remains unpaid, the City may proceed in any or all of the
following ways:
(a) The General Manager of Corporate Services may notify the General
Manager of Public Works of any bill remaining in arrears ninety (90)
calendar days after the due date set forth on the bill for the Sanitary
Surcharge, and upon receipt of such notification the General Manager of
Public Works may cause the water to be shut off and not turned on
again until payment is made of the outstanding bill for the Sanitary
Surcharge based on metered or non-metered water rates, plus a fee for
turning on thewater in the amountset forth in the Waterworks By-law;
(b) Accounts in arrears for a Sanitary Surcharge based on metered or
metered water rates may be collected by distress upon the goods and
chattels of the person or personswho is or are liable to paythe same,or
upon any goods and chattels in the possession of such person or
persons, wherever the same may be found in Ontario; or
the arrears of all accounts for the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered
or non-metered water rates which remain unpaid ninety (90) calendar
days after the due date set forth on the bill for the Sanitary Surcharge,
may be entered on the tax roll for the property connected to the sanitary
sewage systems of the City and collected in the same manner as
municipal taxes, and are subject to the same interest and penalties as
for taxes. Within ten calendar days after such action has been
taken, a written notice to that effect is to be sent by ordinary prepaid mail
by the General Manager of Corporate Services, or on his behalf, to the
owner of the property as set forth in the last revised assessment roll.
9
9. The owner or occupant of lands within the City:
(a) which are connected to the City sanitary sewage system, but
(b) which are not connected to the City’s waterworks system,
areto pay a Sanitary Surcharge as set forth in Schedule “A” attachedtothis By-
law, that is based on one (1) cubic metre (m3) per day, and are to be invoiced
for payment either monthly or bi-monthly bythe General Manager of Corporate
Services or any other body acting on behalf of the General Manager of
Corporate Services under an agreement with the City of Hamilton.
Wastewater Abatement Program
10. A Consumer may apply for an Abatement for a property by firstly submitting to
the Director an application in the form provided by the City (hereinafter referred
to as the “Application”), together with the non-retundable initial application
processing fee set out in Schedule attached to this By-law (hereinafter
referred to as the “Initial Application Processing Fee”). Based on the
information contained in the Application, the Director will determine whether or
not the Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement in accordance with the
provisions of this By-law and will then advise the Consumer whether or not the
Consumer may proceed to the second stage of the qualification process.
11. Should the Director determine that the Consumer may proceed to the second
stage of the qualification process as set out in section 10 of this By-law, the
Director will advise the Consumer as to the fee required to completethe second
stage of the qualification process (hereinafter referred to as the
“Supplementary Application Fee”). The Supplementary Application Fee
represents on a full cost-recovery basis the costs associated with a peer review
to be conducted by the City or its consultant, or both, of the Consumer’s
engineering report noted below in order to determine if the Consumer will
actually qualify for an Abatement. Therefore prior to the final authorization of an
Abatement as set out in section 12 of this By-law, the Consumer shall, at its
sole expense, submit to the Director no later than six (6) months from the date
that the Director advises the Consumer it may proceed to the second stage of
the qualification process, the Supplementary Application Fee as well as a
detailed engineering report either certified by an independent licensed
professional engineer approved by the City, or certified by a licensed
professional engineer and verified by an independent licensed professional
engineer approved by the City, which report at a minimum must contain the
following information with respect tothe previous calendar year:
water consuming
wastewater volumes not discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer systems;
a certification of the water balance for the Consumer’s account, which
shall cover a minimum period of five (5) calendar days over a minimum
of three (3) separate occasions and shall include at least one balance
showing seasonal variation, including activities such as shutdowns;
sewerflow monitoring (if required by the Director);
data on the quality of wastewater discharge to the City’s sanitary sewer
and combined sewer systems, where available;
water billings by the City;
quantity of products produced by the Consumer;
seasonal variations; and
other related information as required by the Director.
12. No Consumer shall be entitled to an Abatement until such Abatement is
authorized by the Director and the General Manager of Corporate Services in
accordance with this By-law. However, once authorized, subject to sections 16
and 17 of this By-law, the Consumer shall be entitled to an Abatement
11
retroactive from January 1 of the calendar year of application. The Abatement
will be credited by the City on a quarterly basis on the same bill sent to an
owner or occupant of lands, or both, for metered or non-metered water, as
applicable, under the Waterworks By-law.
13. To qualify for an Abatement, the volume of wastewater discharged by a
Consumer from its property to the City’s sanitary sewer and combined sewer
systems in a calendar year must be at least 25% less than the measured
volume of all water supplied to the property from all sources, including but not
limited to water supplied bythe City.
14. For the purposes of calculating the volume of wastewater discharged by a
Consumer as set out in section 13 of this By-law, the amount of water or
wastewater that is discharged to a storm sewer which is routed to a City
wastewater treatment plant for treatment shall be deemed to be discharged to
the City’s sanitary sewer and combinedsewer systems.
15. No Consumer is entitled to an Abatement on the Sanitary Surcharge solely
because the Consumer’s property isexempt under the Assessmenf R.S.O.
1990,Chapter A.31, as amended or replaced from time totime.
16. No Consumer is entitled to an Abatement on the Sanitary Surcharge where the
Consumer’s wastewater discharge is not in compliance with the City’s Sewer
Use By-law. Any Abatement authorized in accordance with this By-law will only
be applied from the date that the Consumer’s wastewater dischargecomes into
compliance with the City’s Sewer Use By-law, in the sole opinion of the
Director. Further any Abatement authorized in accordance with this By-law will
automatically terminate should the Consumer’s wastewater discharge
subsequently become not in compliancewith the City’s Sewer Use By-law until
such date that the Consumer‘s wastewater discharge comes into compliance
withthe City’sSewer UseBy-law, in the sole opinionof the Director.
17. No Consumer who is in arrears to the City with regard to payments for any
water supplied by the City, municipal property taxes, Sanitary Surcharge or
12
other fees and charges for the consumption of City water or the use of the
City’s sanitary sewer combined sewer systems, including but not limited
to any fees and charges imposed under the Sewer Use By-law, shall be entitled
to any Abatement as long as such arrears remain outstanding. Any Abatement
authorized in accordance with this By-law will only be applied from the date that
the Consumer’s arrears have been paid in full. Further any Abatement
authorized in accordance with this By-law will automatically terminate should
the Consumer subsequently become in arrearsto the Citywith regard to any of
the matters noted above until such date that the Consumer’s arrears have been
paid infull.
18. That the Abatement for authorized Consumers shall be no more than 75% of
the calculated Sanitary Surcharge for the property for the applicable calendar
year.
19. That the Abatement for a Consumer at a property with less than 100% of its
wastewater diverted from the City’s sewer system, be
calculated with an add-back adjustment of 33.33%to the volumetric charge so
that all ratepayers continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs
associated with inflow and infiltration.
20. That the Abatement for authorized Consumers be phased in at 33.33%of the
maximum permitted Abatement in 2003, 66.66% of the maximum permitted
Abatement in 2004 and 100% of the maximum permitted Abatement in 2005,
and as more particularly set out in Schedule to this By-law. The City
reserves the right to discontinue or continue the wastewater abatement
program and associated Abatement at any time and for any reason
whatsoever.
21 The Consumer shall permit the City and its representatives to conduct an
inspection of the Consumer’s property, at any reasonable time, to verify any
and all information in relation to the Application submitted by the Consumer
prior to any decision to authorizethe Abatement and while any authorization to
provideanAbatement tothe Consumeris in effect.
13
22. Where a Consumer has been authorized to receive an Abatement for a
property in accordance with section 12 of this By-law, the Consumer shall
continue to receive an Abatement in accordance with this By-law provided that,
inaddition to any other requirements contained inthis By-law:
(a) in each of the next three (3) subsequent calendar years after the year in
which the authorization of the Abatement has been given, the Consumer
submits to the Director, in a form and content satisfactory to the Director,
verification that the flow differential between the Consumer’swastewater
discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and combined sewer systems
and the amount of thewater supplied by the Cityto the Consumer for the
previous calendar year continues to meetthe requirementsset out in this
By-law,by no later than the day of February of each calendar year.
(b) where the amount of the authorized Abatement to a Consumer in a
particular calendar year is calculated to be in excess of five hundred
dollars or the actual Abatement provided to the Consumer in
a particular calendar year is in excess of five hundred dollars
the Consume: pays the annual administration fee set forth in Schedule
“B” to this By-law (hereinafter referred to as the “Annual Administrative
Fee”). In such circumstances, the Annual Administration Fee shall be
invoiced to and paid by the Consumer in quarterly installments on the
same bills sent to the Consumer respecting the Abatement credit.
However, where it is not known until after the first quarter of a particular
calendar year that the actual Abatement for a Consumer will be in
excess of five hundred dollars the Annual Administration Fee
shall be invoiced to and paid by the Consumer over the remaining
quarters in the calendar year; and
(c) the Consumer immediately notifies the Director of any change in the
amount of the flow differential between the Consumer’s wastewater
discharge and the amount of water supplied to the property from all
sources, including but not limited to water supplied by the City, provided
14
that the Consumer continues to meet all of the requirements for an
Abatement as set out in this By-law. Should the change cause the
Consumer to no longer meet all of the requirements for an Abatement as
set out in this By-law, the Abatement will automatically terminate.
23. Any failure by a Consumer authorized to receive an Abatement to comply with
the requirements set out in section 22 of this By-law shall entitle the Director
and the General Manager of Corporate Services to revoke or suspend any
Abatement authorized for the Consumer pursuant to this By-law, and to require
the Consumer to pay the full Sanitary Surcharge from the date of such
revocationor suspension.
24. An Abatement authorized in with this By-law will automatically
terminate upon the changing of the owner or occupant of the property and the
new owner or occupant will be required to re-apply for an Abatement in
accordance with the provisions of this By-law, including but not limited to the
payment of all fees, unless in the opinion of the Director and the General
Managerof Corporate Services, the circumstances require otherwise.
25. Should the Director and the General Manager of Corporate Services determine
at any time that the Consumer no longer meets all of the requirements for an
Abatement as set out in this By-law, the Director and the General Manager of
Corporate Services shall beentitledto revoke the Abatement.
26. An Abatement authorized in accordance with section 12 of this By-law
automatically expires five (5) years from the date the authorized Abatement
comes into effect, unless otherwise terminated, revoked or suspended in
accordance with this By-law. To determine eligibility to continue to receive an
Abatement, a Consumer must re-apply for an Abatement in accordance with
the provisions of this By-law, including but not limited to sections and 11 of
this By-law. The provisions of this By-law shall apply to the re-application as
though the Consumer were applying for the first time for an Abatement, except
that the Consumer will only have to pay the Supplementary Application Fee and
notthe InitialApplication Processing Fee.
Genera
fees and charges imposed in-this By-law shall constitute a debt of the
person to the City of Hamilton and if the debt, or any portion thereof, remains
unpaid after the due date established in this By-law,the unpaid amount may be
added to the tax rollfor the person’s property in the City of Hamilton connected
to the City’s sanitary sewer or combined sewer system and collected in a like
manner as municipal taxes, including but not limited to the same interest and
penalties as for municipal taxes.
28. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares a part or the whole of any provision
of this By-law to be invalid or of no force and effect, the provision or part is
deemed severable from this By-law, and the remainder shall survive and be
applied and be enforced in accordance with its terms to the extent possible
underthe law.
29. Schedules and attached hereto form part of this By-law and shall have
the same force and effect as if the provisions contained therein were contained
inthe body of this By-law.
30. That By-lawNo.2-75, as amended, is hereby repealed.
31. This By-law may be known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law”.
This By-law shall come into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment except that section 6 shall be deemed to have come into force and
effect on October 2, 2002.
PASSED this day of September, 2003.
16
SCHEDULE“A”
Sanitary Surcharge
The Sanitary Surcharge is calculated as 100%ofthe gross amount ofthe monthlyor
bimonthly metered water or non-metered water rate.
17
SCHEDULE“B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) InitialApplication Processing Fee $100.00 plus applicable
(section 10)
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $300.00plus applicable
(section 11) taxes and Full Cost
Recoveryfor peer review
(c) AnnualAdministration Fee (where
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 $400.00plus applicable
taxes
2. Indetermining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement under
section ofthis By-law,theAbatement shall becalculatedinaccordance with
the following formula, based on data from the calendaryear priorto the year of
application for theAbatement:
A Annual Volume (m3)of Water Supplied tothe Propertyfrom all sources
B= Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, theApplicant is
eligiblefor the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value
equalto 75%of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’ssanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C =A -B)
D= Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D =CX 133%: add back adjustment of
33% to the volumetric charge sothat all ratepayers continue to pay an
equal portionof the treatment costs associated with inflow and
infiltration)
= Wastewater Abatement in Percentage(before phase-in)
= Wastewater Abatement in Percentage(afterphase-in)
Step 1:
Step 2: D= CX 133%
Step 3: =
A
Step4: = X 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
= X 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
= X 100% (phase-in for 2005)
18
3. Ifan Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-law,
the Abatement will be applied quarterlyeachyear in accordance with the
following formula:
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property bythe Cityduring
the previous quarter
H= Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
I= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003, is$0.669 percubic metreofwater;for
2004 and 2005, will be inaccordancewith the water and Sanitary
Surcharge rates annually determined by City Council)
= Dollar Amount ofAbatement for the billing period
Step5:
Step6:
The following By-laws amend By-law No. 03-272
04-320 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2005 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 15, 2004
05-376 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2006 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 14, 2005
06-344 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2007 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 13, 2006
07-357 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2008 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 12, 2007
08-086 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended
Passed by Council April 23, 2008
08-300 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2009 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 10, 2008
09-153 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy
Passed by Council July 9, 2009
09-261 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2010 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 9, 2009
11-038 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council January 26, 2011
11-312 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2012 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 14, 2011
12-291 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2013 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 12, 2012
13-211 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272
Passed by Council August 16, 2013
13-323 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2014 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 11, 2013
15-028 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council January 22, 2015
15-281 To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
Passed by Council December 9, 2015
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 04-014
( FCSO415O/PWO4127)
CM: December 15,04
Bill No. 320
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-320
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272 and Implement the 2005
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003 the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 15th day of December, 2004, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 04-014 and did
authorize the 2005 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “B” attached to this by-law be substituted therefore.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2005.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this day of December, 2004.
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
Initial Application Processing Fee $10 2.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
Supplementary Application Fee $307.50 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and Full Cost
Recovery for peer review
Annual Administration Fee (where $410 .00 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22( b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: EYO=/A-D)XIOO
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005)
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
4
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; and for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: GxF%=H
Step 6: HxI=$J
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 05-026 (FCSO512 4/PW05143)
CM: December 14,2005
Bill No. 376
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-376
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2006
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003 the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control:
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2005, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 05-026 and did
authorize the 2006 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2006 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “B” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2006.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged for 2006.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 14'h day of December, 2005.
5
y C erk
3
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $10 4.55 F,JS applica e
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $313 .65 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and Full Cost
Recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $418.20 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = /A - D) x 10 0
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005)
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
4
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water; and for 2006 is $0.851 per cubic meter of
water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: GxF%=H
Step 6: HxI=$J
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 06-023 (FCS060114/PWO6137)
CM: December 13, 2006
Bill No. 344
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-344
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2007
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of December, 2006 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 06-023 and did
authorize the 2007 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the fees
and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2007 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “A” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2
2. That Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “B” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
3. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2007.
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged for 2007.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 13th day of December, 2006.
1
H-
MA OR
3
SCHEDULE “A”
Sanitaw Surcharge
The Sanitary Surcharge is calculated as 100% of the gross amount of the
monthly or bi-monthly metered water or non-metered water rate.
4
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $1 06.70 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $31 9.91 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $426.60 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1 : A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: Eo/o = /A - D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
5
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water; for 2006 is $0.851 per cubic meter of water;
and for 2007 is $0.913 per cubic meter of water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: G x F% = H
Step 6: HxI=$J
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 07-036 (FCS07098/PWO7145)
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 357
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-357
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2008
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 07- 036 and
did authorize the 2008 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2008 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate to give reasonable notice.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
3. This by-law shall come into force as of January 1, 2008.
2
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 12th day of December, 2007.
F rg d Ei se nb e rge r
Mayor City Clerk
3
SCHEDULE “A”
Sa ni tar v S ur c ha rqe
The Sanitary Surcharge is calculated as 100% of the gross amount of the
monthly or bi-monthly metered water or non-metered water rate, plus applicable
taxes.
4
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
Initial Application Processing Fee $10 8.83 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
Supplementary Application Fee $326.31 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
Annual Administration Fee (where $435.13 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% =/A - D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
5
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
G = Actual Volume (m3)o f Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water; for 2006 is $0.851 per cubic meter of water;
for 2007 is $0.913 per cubic meter of water; for 2008 is $0.994 per
cubic meter of water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: G x F% = H
Step 6: HxI=$J
Authority: ltem 9, Audit and Administration
Committee Report; 07- 012
CM: October 24,2007
ltem 11, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-015
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 086
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-086
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended.
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS on the 24th day of October, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 9 of Audit and Administration Committee Report 07-
012 and did thereby approve the revised Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy
and the amendment of The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-
law, as amended, to reflect the City's current wastewater account collection
practices;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 11 of Audit and Administration Committee Report
07- 015 and did thereby approve the Water Leak Adjustment Policy and the
amendment of The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law, as
amended, to implement such policy
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section (d. I) immediately after sub-section
I( d):
(d.1) "City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy" means the
policy approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting
of October 24, 2007 as ltem 9(a) of Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-012, as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found
at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
2. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section (d.2) immediately after sub-section
l(d.1):
(d.2) "City of Hamilton Water Leak Adjustment Policy1'm eans the policy
approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting of
December 12, 2007 as Item Il (a) of Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-015 , as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found
at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
3. Section 5 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section 5(d) immediately after sub-section
5(c):
(d) The owner or occupant of lands who are connected to the sanitary
sewage systems of the City shall immediately report to the City of
Hamilton any leaks that develop at the water meter or its couplings.
Where a leak has developed, the City of Hamilton Water Leak
Adjustment Policy may apply to provide adjustments to any
Sanitary Surcharge paid or payable in the circumstances specified
in the policy.
4. Section 7 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
following new section 7 substituted:
7. The City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy will
apply to the collection of unpaid fees and charges consisting of the
Sanitary Surcharge.
5. Section 8 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
following new section 8 substituted:
8. Where an account for the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered or
non-metered water rates remains unpaid, the following provisions
apply:
(a) The unpaid Sanitary Surcharge imposed by this By-law on a
person is a debt due to the City of Hamilton and the City of
Hamilton may take such action as it considers necessary
and as permitted by law to collect the debt.
(b) Such unpaid amount may be added to the tax roll for the
property to which the City's sewage system is connected,
and collected in the same manner as municipal taxes.
(c) Without limiting the provisions of sub-sections 8(a) and (b)
above, the City of Hamilton may shut off the supply of water
to a property if the fees or charges payable by the owners or
occupants of the property in respect of the Sanitary
Surcharge are overdue. The fees for turning off the water
and turning on the water, as set out in Schedule "Ent o the
Waterworks By-law, must also be paid to the City before the
water will be turned on again.
6. Sections I,4 and 5 of this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force
as of the 24th day of October, 2007.
7. Sections 2 and 3 of this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force
as of the 12'~d ay of December, 2007.
8. In all other respects, the. contents of By-law 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED and ENACTED this 23rdd ay of April, 2008.
in C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk




Authority: Item 9, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 09-008;
CM: May 13, 2009
Bil No. 153
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-153
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the
Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of May, 2009 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 9 of Audit and Administration Committee Report 09-
008 and did approve the Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy described
therein;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to amend The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law to implement the said Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section (d.3) immediately after sub-section
1(d.2):
(d.3) "City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy" means the policy approved by the Council of the
City of Hamilon at its meeting of May 13, 2009 as Item 9 of the
Audit and Administration Committee Report 09-008, as amended or
re-enacted from time to time, and any successor to such policy.
This policy may be found at the Office of the City Clerk for the City
of Hamilton.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the Consecutive
Estimated Accounts Policy
Page 2 of 3
2. Sub-section (i) of section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed
and the following sub-section substituted:
"General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services" means the
(i)
General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services for the City of
Hamilton or the person duly authorized to act in his or her stead.
3. All references in By-law No. 03-272, as amended, to the "General
Manager of Corporate Services" are amended by striking out each
reference and by substituting in each case "General Manager of Finance
and Corporate Services".
4. Sub-section 5(c) of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
following sub-section 5(c) substituted:
(c) Where a water meter fails to record properly, the person or persons
liable to pay the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered water rates
are liable to pay such Sanitary Surcharge on the water rate for an
amount of water estimated on the basis of a corresponding period
in the immediately preceding year, or, where the water user did not
occupy the same property for the same period during the
corresponding period in the previous year, then such person or
persons are liable to pay such Sanitary Surcharge on the water rate
for an amount of water based on a similar period of the current
year, or where that is not applicable, then the person or persons
are liable for such Sanitary Surcharge based on the applicable
minimum charge for water imposed by the City under the
Waterworks By-law. Where the City is unable to obtain water meter
data for the actual amount of water supplied to a property, the
water user will be liable to pay the Sanitary Surcharge on the
metered or non-metered water rates for the estimated amounts of
water supplied to the property as set out in the City of Hamilton
Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy.
Should the General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services,
or any other body acting on behalf of the General Manager of
Finance and Corporate Services under an agreement with the City,
subsequently receive the water meter data on the amount of water
actually supplied to the property by the City, the amount billed to
such person or persons will be subsequently adjusted to reflect the
actual amount of water supplied to the property, where such actual
amount is greater than the estimated amounts invoiced, and the
person or persons shall be liable for the resulting adjusted Sanitary
Surcharge on the adjusted water rate.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the Consecutive
Estimated Accounts Policy
Page 3 of 3
5. This by-law shall come into force on the day it is passed.
6. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 9th day of July, 2009.
.... ..~~
~
~nson -
Chad CoilinG Fre Eise('be(~ ~
i'.cting Mayor City Clerk
Authority: Item 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-034 (FCS09102/PW09100)
CM: December 9, 2009 and
Item 11, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 09-012 ((FCS09058)
CM: September 9, 2009
Bill No. 261
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09- 261
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2010
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 9th day of December, 2009 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of Committee of the Whole Report 09-034 and did
authorize the 2010 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the fees
and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2010 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
AND WHEREAS on the 16th day of September, 2009, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 11 of Audit and Administration Committee Report
09-012 and did approve the Wastewater Abatement Program amendment
described herein.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Sub-section l(f) of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
,
following substituted:
2
(f) "Commercial" means of or pertaining to retail and wholesale sales of
food grown on a farm, manufactured goods and/or services;"
2. Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2010, except that section 1
,
shall be deemed to have come into force on September 16, 2009.
In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, are
,
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED and ENACTED this 9th day of December, 2009.
Fr ger
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE "B"
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
(a) Initial Application Processing Fee $114.78 plus applicable
.
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $344.15 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $458.92 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
,
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (before phase in)
F% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A- D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
.
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
4
actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the
e ,,..
City during the previous quarter
H= volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
I= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2010 is $1.0802 per cubic meter of water)
$J= dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: GxF%=H
Step 6: Hxl=$J
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-001 (FCS11009/PW11004)
CM: January 26, 2011
Bil No. 038
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-038
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.D. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 26th day of January, 2011 the Council of the City of
Issues Committee Report 11-001 and
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General
did authorize the 2011 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2011 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
1.
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2011 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 4
3. This by-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 26th day of January, 2011.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 4
SCHEDULE "B"
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $117.08 plus applicable
taxes
(Section 10)
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $351.03 plus applicable
taxes and full cost
(Section 11)
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $468.10 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 1 0 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (before phase in)
F% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (after phase in)
A-B=C
Step 1:
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A - D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 4
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
G = actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2011 is $1.126 per cubic meter of water)
$J = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: G x F% = H
Step 6: H x i = $J
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-035 (FCS11100/PW11086)
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 312
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-312
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2012
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2011 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-035 and
did authorize the 2012 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2012 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 20 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the
following:
20. That the Abatement for authorized Consumers be 100% of the
maximum permitted Abatement and as more particularly set out in
Schedule “B” to this By-law. The City reserves the right to
discontinue or continue the wastewater abatement program and
associated Abatement at any time and for any reason whatsoever.
2
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
,
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
,
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2012 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2012.
,
5. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272 are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2011.
\
R.
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $119.65 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $358.76 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $478.40 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the City
during the previous quarter
4
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2012 is $1.174 per cubic meter of water)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = H
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 12-031(a) (FCS12076/PW12085)
CM: December 12, 2012
Bill No. 291
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-291
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2013
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O.
2001, c.25, a municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the
municipality acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the said Act
or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the said Act;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 12t" day of December, 2012 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 12-031(a)
and did authorize the 2013 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2013 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of ihe City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting sub-section (o)
,
and by relettering the subsequent sub-sections accordingly.
2. Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272
and Implement the 2013 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 4
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
.
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2013 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
This by-law comes into force on January 1,2013.
,
PASSED this 12th day of December, 2012.
R. :lna R.
Mayor
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272
and Implement the 2013 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 4
SCHEDULE "B"
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
(a) Initial Application Processing Fee $122.40 plus applicable
.
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary.Application Fee $367.00 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $489.40 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
.
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A- B = C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A- D) x 100
A
If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
,
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F _, actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the City
during the previous quarter
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272
and Implement the 2013 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 4
G ._ volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2013 is $1.223 per cubic meter of water)
$1 = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: FxE%=G
Step 5: GxH=$1
Authority: Item 5, Public Works Committee
Report 13-009
CM: August 16, 2013
Bill No. 211
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 13-211
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of February, 2013 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 2 of Public Works Committee Report 13-002 and
did direct that The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law be
amended to reflect that the calculation used for determining potential eligibility for
the wastewater abatement program only include water provided from the
municipal water supply;
AND WHEREAS on the 16th day of August, 2013, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 5 of Public Works Committee Report 13-009 and
did direct that The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law be
amended to reflect some additional technical and housekeeping amendments as
set out in this by-law;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Section 1 as follows:
Definitions
1. In this By-law,
2
"Abatement" means a credit on the Sanitary Surcharge amount paid by the
Consumer, as approved by the City under the wastewater abatement program
described in this By-law;
"Annual Administration Fee" has the meaning assigned in sub-section 22(b) of
this By-law;
"Application" has the meaning assigned in section 10 of this By-law;
"City" means the City of Hamilton;
"City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy" means the policy
approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting of October 24,
2007 as Item 9(a) of Audit and Administration Committee Report 07-012, as
amended or re-enacted from time to time, and any successor to such policy. This
policy may be found at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton;
"City of Hamilton Water Leak Adjustment Policy" means the policy approved by
the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting of December 12, 2007 as Item
11(a) of Audit and Administration committee Report 07-015, as amended or re-
enacted from time to time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be
found at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton;
"City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated Accounts
Policy" means the policy approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its
meeting of May 13, 2009 as Item 9 of the Audit and Administration Committee
Report 09-008, as amended or re-enacted from time to time, and any successor
to such policy. This policy may be found at the Office of the City Clerk for the City
of Hamilton;
"combined sewer" means a sewer intended to function simultaneously as a storm
sewer and a sanitary sewer;
"Commercial" means of or pertaining to retail and wholesale sales of food grown
on a farm, manufactured goods and/or services;
"Consumer" means either a Commercial or Industrial ratepayer who is
responsible under the Waterworks By-law and this By-law for paying fees and
charges respecting water supplied by the City of Hamilton and wastewater
services provided by the City of Hamilton;
"Director" shall mean the Director of Hamilton Water, Public Works Department,
for the City of Hamilton, the person duly authorized to act in his or her stead, or
his or her successor;
"General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services" means the General
Manager of Finance and Corporate Services for the City or the persons the
General Manager may designate from time to time to act in his or her stead for
purposes of this By-law, or successor;
"General Manager of Public Works" means the General Manager of the Public
Works Department for the City or the persons the General Manager may
designate from time to time to act in his or her stead for purposes of this By-law,
or successor;
"Industrial" means of or pertaining to the manufacturing, producing or processing
of anything, or the research or development in connection with the
manufacturing, producing or processing of anything;
"Initial Application Processing Fee" has the meaning assigned in section 10 of
this By-law;
"potable water" means water that is fit for human consumption;
"potable water supply" means potable water supplied by the City;
"sanitary sewage system" means,
(i)
the buildings, structures, plant, machinery, equipment,
appurtenances, devices, conduits, outlets, underground pipelines
4
and installations, and other works designated for the collection and
treatment of sanitary sewage by the City, and
(ii) includes lands appropriated for such purposes and uses;
"sanitary sewage works" means,
(i) all sanitary sewers, sanitary sewer systems, pumping stations,
sewage treatment plants, and
includes combined sewers, sanitary private drains and other works
for the collection, acceptance, transmission, treatment and disposal
of sanitary sewage;
"Sewer Use By-law" means By-law R89-049 of the City of Hamilton, as
amended or replaced from time to time;
"stormwater" means water from rainfall or other natural precipitation or from the
melting of snow or ice or drainage from land or a watercourse;
"Supplementary Application Fee" has the meaning assigned in section 11 of this
By-law;
"water rate" means the fees and charges established by the City of Hamilton
under By-law R84-026; and
"Waterworks By-law" means By-law R84-026 of the City of Hamilton.
Section 11 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting subsections (a)
,
to (i) inclusive and replacing them with the new subsections (a) to (m) as
follows:
(a) volume of incoming water to the property from all sources including
but not limited to private wells and reservoirs, stormwater, and
water from a watercourse such as a lake, harbour, stream, river,
pond or spring;
(b) volume of potable water purchased by the Consumer from the
potable water supply;
(c) volume of water discharged to a sanitary sewage works that was
purchased by the Consumer from the potable water supply;
(d) volume of water discharged to a sanitary sewage works that was
not purchased by the Consumer from the potable water supply;
(e) water consuming processes/products;
(f) wastewater volumes diverted from the City's sanitary sewage
works;
(g) a certification of the water balance for the Consumer's account,
which shall cover a minimum period of five calendar days over a
minimum of three separate occasions and shall include at least one
balance showing seasonal variation, including activities such as
shutdowns;
(h) sewer flow monitoring (if required by the Director);
(i) data on the quality of wastewater discharge to the City's sanitary
sewage works, where available;
(j) water billings by the City;
(k) quantity of products produced by the Consumer;
(I) seasonal variations; and
(m) other related information as required by the Director.
Section 13 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced by the following
,
new Section 13:
13. To qualify for an Abatement, the volume of water that was sourced
from the potable water supply and diverted from the City's sanitary
sewage works in a calendar year must be at least 25% of the
measured volume of water purchased by the Consumer from the
potable water supply.
6
Section 14 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced by the following
,
new Section 14:
14. For the purposes of calculating the volume of water that was
sourced from the potable water supply and diverted from the City's
sanitary sewage works by a Consumer, as set out in section 13, the
amount of water or wastewater that is discharged to a storm sewer
which is routed to a City wastewater treatment plant for treatment
shall be deemed to not be diverted from the City's sanitary sewage
works.
Section 15 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced by the following
,
new Section 15:
15. No Consumer is entitled to an Abatement:
(a) solely because the Consumer's property is'exempt under the
Assessment Act, R.S.O. 1990, Chapter A.31;
(b) to the extent the water supplied to the Consumer's property is
not purchased by the Consumer from the potable water supply;
or
(c) to the extent the water supplied to the Consumer's property is
purchased by the Consumer from the potable water supply and
that water is used for one or more of the following purposes:
(i) irrigation for ground maintenance on the Consumer's
property,
(ii) recreational activities on the Consumer's property, including
but not limited to the filling of a swimming pool, hot tub or
fountain;
(iii) cleaning, consumption or other uses which do not occur on
the Consumer's property.
Section 22 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended as follows:
.
(a) the word "potable" is added before the word "water" in the sixth line of
subsection 22(a); and
(b) the word "potable" is added before the word "water" in the fourth line of
subsection 22(c).
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
,
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
This by-law shall come into force on the date of its passing.
,
PASSED this 16th day of August, 2013.
R. Bratina / ÿ/ " " ÿ" R. Cÿ
Mayor Cle
SCHEDULE "B"
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
(a) Initial Application Processing Fee $122.40 plus applicable
,
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $367.00 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $489.40 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
,
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City's sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B) or C=actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A - B = C; or C=actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A- D) x 100
A
If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
.
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
F ...,
City during the previous quarter
G= volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2013 is $1.223 per cubic meter of water)
$1= dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: FxE%=G
Step 5: GxH=$1
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 13-022(a)
CM: December 11,2013
Bill No. 323
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 13-323
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No.
03-272 and ImpJement the 2014 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O.
2001, c.25, a municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the
municipality acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the said
Act or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the said Act;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 11th day of December, 2013 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 13-022(a)
and did authorize the 2014 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2014 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the words "To Impose Fees
,
and Charges Respecting the Use of the City of Hamilton Sanitary
Sewage System and to Implement a Wastewater Abatement Program"
on the first page of the By-law prior to the preamble, and by substituting
therefor the words "To Impose Fees and Charges Respecting the Use of
the City of Hamilton Sanitary and Storm Sewage Systems and to
Implement a Wastewater Abatement Program.
The Preamble to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the
,
following new Preamble:
WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 Of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O.
2001, c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided
or done by or on behalf of the municipality, including the provisions of
public utilities such as water and sewage, and for the use of the
municipality's property, including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001,
S.O. 2001, c. 25, fees and charges may be imposed to recover costs
related to the establishment, construction, maintenance, operation and
financing of the City of Hamilton wastewater/storm system;
AND WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of
Hamilton passed and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to
as "The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS this by-law imposes fees and charges consisting of a
wastewater/storm rate, and implements the wastewater abatement
program;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the words "Sanitary
,
Surcharge" and "sanitary surcharge" every time such words appear in the
By-law and by substituting therefor in each case the words
"wastewatedstorm fees and charges".
Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the word "Initial" in
,
the definition of "Initial Application Processing Fee".
Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the definition of
,
"Supplementary Application Fee".
3
Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by adding the following
,
definition:
"wastewater/storm fees and charges" means the fees and charges set out
in Schedule "A" to this By-law.
Section 3 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the following
,
new section 3:
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charqes
The owners and occupants of all lands within the geographic area
,
of the City who are connected to the sanitary sewage system of the
City are liable to pay wastewater/storm fees and charges in
accordance with the provisions of this By-law and as set forth in
Schedule "A" to this By-law.
Section 4 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the following
,
new Section 4:
Liability for Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charqes where Non-Metered
Water Rates Apply
Where there is a non-metered water rate imposed by the
,
Waterworks By-law for the whole or any part of the City, then the
wastewater/storm fees and charges shall be the non-metered
annual wastewater/storm rate as set forth in Schedule "A" to this
By-law.
Subsection 5(a) of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the
,
following new subsection 5(a):
Liability for Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charqes on Metered Water
Rates
(a) Where there is a metered water rate imposed by the Waterworks
By-law for the whole or any part of the City, then the
wastewater/storm fees and charges shall consist of a daily
wastewater/storm fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment
charge as set forth in Schedule "A" to this By-law.
10. Subsection 5(c) of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the
following new subsection 5(c):
(c) Where a water meter fails to record properly, the person or persons
liable to pay wastewater/storm fees and charges are liable to pay:
4
(i) the daily wastewater/storm fixed charge, plus the
wastewatedstorm treatment charge calculated on an amount of
water estimated on the basis of a corresponding period in the
immediately preceding year; or
(ii) where the water user did not occupy the same property for the
same period during the corresponding period in the previous year,
the daily wastewater/storm fixed charge, plus the wastewater/storm
treatment charge calculated on an amount of water based on a
similar period of the current year; or
(iii) where the situation described in clause (ii) is not applicable,
the daily wastewater/storm fixed charge plus the wastewater/storm
treatment charge that is based on one cubic metre (m3) of water
consumption per day.
Where the City is unable to obtain water meter data for the actual
amount of water supplied to a property, the water user will be liable
to pay the daily wastewater/storm fixed charge plus the
wastewater/storm treatment charge for the estimated amounts of
water supplied to the property as set out in the City of Hamilton
Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy.
Should the General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services,
or any other body acting on behalf of the General Manager of
Finance and Corporate Services under an agreement with the City,
subsequently receive the water meter data on the amount of water
actually supplied to the property by the City, the amount billed to
such person or persons will be subsequently adjusted to reflect the
actual amount of water supplied to the property, where such actual
amount is greater than the estimated amounts invoiced, and the
person or persons shall be liable for the resulting adjusted
wastewatedstorm treatment charge.
11. Section 8 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the words in the
first two lines of the section and by substituting therefor the words "Where
an account for wastewater/storm fees and charges remains unpaid, the
following provisions apply:".
12. Section 9 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the following
new Section 9:
9. The owner or occupant of lands within the City:
(a) which are connected to the City sanitary sewage system, but
(b) which are not connected to the City's waterworks system,
5
are to pay wastewater/storm fees and charges as set forth in
Schedule "A" to this By-law, consisting of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge, and a wastewater/storm treatment charge that is based
on one cubic metre (m3) of water consumption per day, and are to be
invoiced for payment bi-monthly, monthly or at any other time as
determined to be appropriate by the General Manager of Finance and
Corporate Services or by any other body acting on behalf of the
General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services under an
agreement with the City.
13. Sections 10, 11 and 12 of By-law No. 03-272 are deleted and
replaced with the following new Sections 10, 11 and 12:
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
10. (a) A Consumer may apply for an Abatement for a property by
submitting to the Director an application in the form provided
by the City (hereinafter referred to as the "Application"),
together with a non-refundable application processing fee as
set out in Schedule "B" to this By-law (hereinafter referred to
as the "Application Processing Fee").
(b) Based on the information contained in the Application, the
Director will determine whether the Consumer is required to
obtain the services of a professional engineering consultant
to prepare and submit a report to the City as set out in
section 11.
(c) Upon the Director advising the Consumer in writing that the
Consumer is required to obtain the services of a
professional engineering consultant, the Consumer shall, at
its sole expense, and no later than six months from the date
of the Director's written notice, submit a report to .the City as
set out in section 11, which report is either certified by:
(i) an independent professional engineer licensed in the
Province of Ontario; or
(ii) an in-house professional engineer licensed in the
Province of Ontario and verified through a peer
review conducted by an independent professional
engineer approved by the City and at the expense of
the Consumer.
(d)- Where the Consumer fails to submit the engineering report
to the City within the six month period referred to in
subsection (c), the Consumer's application will be deemed to
6
be rejected and the Consumer's Application Processing Fee
will be forfeited. Should the Consumer still wish to apply for
an Abatement, the Consumer will have to re-apply for the
Abatement by submitting a new application and a new
Application Processing Fee.
11. Where the Director requires the Consumer to obtain the services
of a professional engineering consultant, the report to be
submitted, shall, at a minimum, contain the following information
with respect to the previous twelve month period:
(a) volume of incoming water to the property from all sources
including but not limited to private wells and reservoirs,
stormwater, and water from a watercourse such as a lake,
harbour, stream, river, pond or spring;
(b) volume of potable water purchased by the Consumer from
the potable water supply;
(c) volume of water discharged to a sanitary sewage works that
was purchased by the Consumer from the potable water
supply;
(d) volume of water discharged to a sanitary sewage works that
was not purchased by the Consumer from the potable water
supply;
(e) water consuming processes/products;
(f) wastewater volumes diverted from the City's sanitary
sewage works;
(g) a certification of the water balance for the Consumer's
account, which shall cover a minimum period of five
calendar days over a minimum of three separate occasions
and shall include at least one balance showing seasonal
variation, including activities such as shutdowns;
(h) sewer flow monitoring (if required by the Director);
(i) data on the quality of wastewater discharge to the City's
sanitary sewage works, where available;
(j) water billings by the City;
(k) quantity of products produced by the Consumer;
7
(I) seasonal variations; and
(m) other related information as required by the Director.
12. No Consumer shall be entitled to an Abatement until such
Abatement has been authorized by the Director and the General
Manager of Finance and Corporate Services in accordance with
this By-law. However, once authorized, subject to sections 16
and 17 of this By-law, the Consumer shall be entitled to an
Abatement retroactive from the date the Application was
submitted to the City. The Abatement will be credited by the City
on the same bill sent to the owner or occupant of lands, or both,
for metered or non-metered water, as applicable, under the
Waterworks By-law,
14, Section 18 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the following
new section 18:
18. That the Abatement for authorized Consumers shall be no more than
75% of the calculated wastewater/storm treatment charge for the
property for the applicable calendar year.
15. Subsection 22(b) of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the words
"Annual Administrative Fee" that are in brackets in the sixth and seventh
lines of the subsection and by substituting therefor the words "Annual
Administration Fee".
16. Section 26 of By-law No. 03-272 is amended by deleting the words ",except
that the Consumer will only have to pay the Supplementary Application Fee
and not the Initial Application Processing Fee" from the end of the section.
17. Section 31 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the following
new section 31:
31. This By-law may be known and referred to as the
"Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges and Wastewater Abatement
By-law."
18. Schedule "A" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law.
19. Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
8
20. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the Council
of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater certainty this
includes continuing in force after December 31, 2014 until amended,
repealed or replaced.
21. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2014.
PASSED this 1 lth day of December, 2013.
R, R,
Mayor
SCHEDULE"A"
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges
I. Metered Water Customers
The WastewatedStorm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charge
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City's wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.29
16 mm $ 0.29
20 mm $ 0.29
25 mm $ 0.73
38 mm $ 1.45
50 mm $ 2.32
75 mm $ 4.64
100 mm $ 7.25
150 mm $14.50
200 mm $23.20
250 mm $33.35
300 mm $49.30
10'
Schedule "A " continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Char,qe
Wastewatedstorm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.66 1.32
2 >10 1.32 1.32
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $467.60 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $461.62 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $929.22 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
11
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $573.10 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C=actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C=actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
12
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this
By-law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance
with the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 7.4, Motion
(FCS15002)
CM: January 21, 2015
Bill No. 028
CiTY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 15-028
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No.
03-272 and Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 9 and 10 of the MunicipalAct, 2001, S.O.
2001, c.25, a municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the
municipality acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the said
Act or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the Iÿublic, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the said Act;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 21st day of January, 2015 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 8.1 of General Issues Committee Report 15-003
and did authorize the 2015 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2015 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Schedule "A" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law.
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
,
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 6
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
,
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2015 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
4ÿ This by-law comes into force on January 22, 2015.
PASSED this 21st day of January, 2015.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 6
SCHEDULE "A"
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charqes
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charqe
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City's wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.30
16 mm $ 0.30
20 mm $ 0.30
25 mm $ 0.75
38 mm $ 1.50
50 mm $ 2.40
75 mm $ 4.80
100 mm $ 7.50
150 mm $15.00
200 mm $24.00
250 mm $34.50
300 mm $51.00
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 6
Schedule ",4" continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Charge
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.71 1.41
2 >10 1.41 1.41
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $499.40 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $472.20 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $971.60 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
Page 5 of 6
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $586.60 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an
Abatement under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be
calculated in accordance with the following formula, based on data from
the calendar year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C=actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C=actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2015 Fees and Charges
Page 6 of 6
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 15-024 (FCS15073)
CM: December 9, 2015
Bill No. 281
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 15-281
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O.
2001, c.25, a municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the
municipality acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the said
Act or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the said Act;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 9th day of December, 2015 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 5.2 of General Issues Committee Report 15-024
and did authorize the 2016 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2016 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule "A" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law.
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
(Page 2 of 6)
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
,
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2016 until
afnended, repealed or replaced.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2016.
,
PASSED this 9th day of December, 2015.
F'Eÿrnberger (,ÿ
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
(Page 3 of 6)
SCHEDULE "A"
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charqes
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charqe
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intendedto offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City's wastewateristorm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.32
16 mm $ 0.32
20 mm $ 0.32
25 mm $ 0.80
38 mm $ 1.60
50 mm $ 2.56
75mm $ 5.12
100 mm $ 8.00
150 mm $16.00
200 mm $25.60
250 mm $36.80
300 mm $54.40
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
(Page 4 of 6)
Schedule "A" continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Char.qe
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.74 1.48
2 > 10 1.48 1.48
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $540.20 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $503.70 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $1,043.90 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
(Page 5 of 6)
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $578.80 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C=actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C=actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2016 Fees and Charges
(Page 6 of 6)
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 16-030 (FCS16079)
CM: December 14, 2016
Bill No. 321
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 16-321
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2017 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O.
2001, c.25, a municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the
municipality acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the said
Act or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the said Act;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2016 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 16-030 and
did authorize the 2017 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2017 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2017 Fees and Charges
(Page 2 of 6)
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law.
3. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2017 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
4. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2017.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2016.
__________________________ ______________________________
F. Eisenberger R. Caterini
Mayor City Clerk
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2017 Fees and Charges
(Page 3 of 6)
SCHEDULE “A”
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charge
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City’s wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.34
16 mm $ 0.34
20 mm $ 0.34
25 mm $ 0.85
38 mm $ 1.70
50 mm $ 2.72
75 mm $ 5.44
100 mm $ 8.50
150 mm $17.00
200 mm $27.20
250 mm $39.10
300 mm $57.80
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2017 Fees and Charges
(Page 4 of 6)
Schedule “A” continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Charges
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.77 1.54
2 >10 1.54 1.54
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $562.10 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $521.95 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $1,084.05 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2017 Fees and Charges
(Page 5 of 6)
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $583.20 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C = actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C = actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2017 Fees and Charges
(Page 6 of 6)
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 23, General Issues Committee
Report 16-032 (FSC16092)
CM: December 14, 2016
Wards: City Wide
Bill No. 051
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 17-051
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton
passed By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2016, the Council of the City
of Hamilton approved Item 23 of General Issues Committee Report 16-032 to
amend By-law 03-272 to change from quarterly to monthly billing for all
customers of municipal wastewater/storm services.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 9 of By-law 03-272, is amended by deleting the word “bi-
monthly,” from the seventh line of the section.
2. Subsection 22(b) of By-law 03-272, is deleted and replaced with the
following new subsection 22(b):
(b) where the amount of the authorized Abatement to a Consumer
in a particular calendar year is calculated to be in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), or the actual Abatement provided to
the Consumer in a particular calendar year is in excess of five
hundred dollars ($500.00), the Consumer pays the annual
administration fee set forth in Schedule “B” to this By-law
(hereinafter referred to as the “Annual Administration Fee”). In
such circumstances, the Annual Administration Fee shall be
invoiced to and paid by the Consumer in monthly installments
on the same bills sent to the Consumer respecting the
Abatement credit. However, where it is not known until after the
first month of a particular calendar year that the actual
Abatement for a Consumer will be in excess of five hundred
dollars ($500.00), the Annual Administration Fee shall be
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272
(Page 2 of 2)
invoiced to and paid by the Consumer over the remaining
months in the calendar year; and
3. Section 3, in Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, is amended by
deleting the word “quarterly” from the second line of the section and
replacing it with the word “monthly”.
4. This By-law comes into force on March 30, 2017.
PASSED this 29 day of March, 2017.
___________________________ ___________________________
F. Eisenberger R. Caterini
Mayor City Clerk
2
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 17-026
CM: December 8, 2017
Ward: City Wide
Bill No. 263
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 17-263
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2018 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacted
By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, a
municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the municipality
acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the said Act or any
other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers necessary or
desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities such as water
and sewage, as defined in the said Act;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, sections 9
and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws imposing fees or
charges for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of the
municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 8th day of December, 2017 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 17-026 and
did authorize the 2018 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2018 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2018 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 6
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law.
3. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2018 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
4. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2018.
PASSED this 8th day of December, 2017.
__________________________ ______________________________
F. Eisenberger R. Caterini
Mayor City Clerk
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2018 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 6
SCHEDULE “A”
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charge
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City’s wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.36
16 mm $ 0.36
20 mm $ 0.36
25 mm $ 0.90
38 mm $ 1.80
50 mm $ 2.88
75 mm $ 5.76
100 mm $ 9.00
150 mm $18.00
200 mm $28.80
250 mm $41.40
300 mm $61.20
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2018 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 6
Schedule “A” continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Charges
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.81 1.61
2 >10 1.61 1.61
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $587.65 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $543.85 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $1,131.50 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2018 Fees and Charges
Page 5 of 6
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $693.30 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C = actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C = actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and
Implement the 2018 Fees and Charges
Page 6 of 6
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 18-020 (FCS18087)
CM: December 19, 2018
Ward: City Wide
Bill No. 343
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 18-343
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2019 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, a
municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the municipality
acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the Municipal Act 2001
or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the Municipal Act, 2001;
AND WHEREAS sections 9, 10 and 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, authorize a
municipality to pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities
provided or done by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the
municipality’s property, including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 19th day of December, 2018 the Council of the City of
Hamilton approved Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 18-020 and
authorized the 2019 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2019 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2019 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 6
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law.
3. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2019 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
4. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2019.
PASSED this 19th day of December, 2018.
__________________________ ______________________________
F. Eisenberger J. Pilon
Mayor Acting City Clerk
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2019 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 6
SCHEDULE “A”
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charge
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City’s wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.38
16 mm $ 0.38
20 mm $ 0.38
21 mm $ 0.38
25 mm $ 0.95
38 mm $ 1.90
50 mm $ 3.04
75 mm $ 6.08
100 mm $ 9.50
150 mm $19.00
200 mm $30.40
250 mm $43.70
300 mm $64.60
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2019 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 6
Schedule “A” continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Charges
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.84 1.68
2 >10 1.68 1.68
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $613.20 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $565.75 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $1,178.95 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2019 Fees and Charges
Page 5 of 6
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $712.80 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C = actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C = actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2019 Fees and Charges
Page 6 of 6
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 19-025 (FCS19070)
CM: November 27/28, 2019
Ward: City Wide
Bill No. 288
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 19-288
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2020 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, a
municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the municipality
acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the Municipal Act 2001
or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the Municipal Act, 2001;
AND WHEREAS sections 9, 10 and 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, authorize a
municipality to pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities
provided or done by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the
municipality’s property, including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 27th day of November, 2019 the Council of the City of
Hamilton approved Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 19-025 and
authorized the 2020 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2020 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2020 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 6
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law.
3. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2020 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
4. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2020.
PASSED this 28th day of November, 2019.
__________________________ ______________________________
F. Eisenberger A. Holland
Mayor City Clerk
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2020 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 6
SCHEDULE “A”
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charge
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City’s wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.39
16 mm $ 0.39
20 mm $ 0.39
21 mm $ 0.39
25 mm $ 0.98
38 mm $ 1.95
50 mm $ 3.12
75 mm $ 6.24
100 mm $ 9.75
150 mm $19.50
200 mm $31.20
250 mm $44.85
300 mm $66.30
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2020 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 6
Schedule “A” continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Charges
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Multi-Residential,
Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.88 1.75
2 >10 1.75 1.75
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $638.75 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $594.95 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $1,233.70 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2020 Fees and Charges
Page 5 of 6
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $374.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $745.30 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C = actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C = actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2020 Fees and Charges
Page 6 of 6
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 20-020 (FCS20073)
CM: December 16, 2020
Ward: City Wide
Bill No. 256
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 20-256
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2021 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, a
municipality may pass by-laws respecting public assets of the municipality
acquired for the purpose of exercising its authority under the Municipal Act 2001
or any other Act, and respecting services that the municipality considers
necessary or desirable for the public, including the provision of public utilities
such as water and sewage, as defined in the Municipal Act, 2001;
AND WHEREAS sections 9, 10 and 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, authorize a
municipality to pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities
provided or done by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the
municipality’s property, including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 25th day of November, 2020 the Council of the City of
Hamilton approved Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 20-020 and
authorized the 2021 fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2021 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law.
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2021 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 6
3. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2021 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
4. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2021.
PASSED this 16th day of December, 2020.
__________________________ ______________________________
F. Eisenberger A. Holland
Mayor City Clerk
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2021 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 6
SCHEDULE “A”
Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges
I. Metered Water Customers
The Wastewater/Storm Fees and Charges consist of a daily wastewater/storm
fixed charge and a wastewater/storm treatment charge.
A) Daily Wastewater/Storm Fixed Charge
The daily wastewater/storm fixed charge is not related to the direct costs
of consumption and are not dependent upon or related to the amount of
consumption incurred. The fixed charges are intended to offset the fixed
costs of maintaining the City’s wastewater/storm sewage systems.
Wastewater/Storm
Meter Size Rate
15mm $ 0.42
16 mm $ 0.42
20 mm $ 0.42
21 mm $ 0.42
25 mm $ 1.05
38 mm $ 2.10
50 mm $ 3.36
75 mm $ 6.72
100 mm $10.50
150 mm $21.00
200 mm $33.60
250 mm $48.30
300 mm $71.40
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2021 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 6
Schedule “A” continued
B) Wastewater/Storm Treatment Charges
Wastewater/storm treatment charges are based on metered water
consumption and the cost of wastewater collection and treatment, and
stormwater management. Charges are on a per cubic meter basis at the
rates indicated in the table below. The total monthly wastewater/storm
treatment charge is the sum of usage in all blocks at the rate for each block:
Residential Residential Meter
Meter Size Size =>25mm and
<25mm Commercial,
Institutional &
Industrial
Monthly Water Rate ($/m3) Rate ($/m3)
Consumption Consumption (m3)
Block
1 0-10 0.91 1.82
2 >10 1.82 1.82
II. Non-Metered Water Customers
The non-metered annual wastewater/storm rate is $664.30 per annum, plus
applicable taxes,
Note: The non-metered annual water rate for water supplied by the City of
Hamilton is $620.50 per annum, plus applicable taxes, for a combined total non-
metered water and wastewater/storm annual rate of $1,284.80 per annum, plus
applicable taxes.
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2021 Fees and Charges
Page 5 of 6
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Application Processing Fee $381.99 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review, if
required by Director
(b) Annual Administration Fee (where $760.21 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from the
potable water supply
B = annual volume of water that was sourced from the potable water
supply and diverted from the City’s sanitary sewage works (if B is
less than 25% of A, the Consumer is not eligible for the Abatement;
if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B) or C = actual measured value
using sewer flow monitoring if required by the Director
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C; or C = actual measured value using sewer flow
monitoring if required by the Director
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2021 Fees and Charges
Page 6 of 6
Schedule “B” continued
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of potable water supplied to the property by the
City during the previous quarter
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= wastewater/storm treatment charge (see Schedule “A” to this By-
law)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = G
Step 5: G x H = $I



Content from 03296 snow removal bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 4, Committee of the Whole
Report 03-028 (PW03130/PD03226)
CM: October 15, 2003
Bill No. 296
CITY OF HAMILTON
By-law No. 03-296
Being a By-law to provide for the removal of snow and ice from
roofs and sidewalks
WHEREAS Section 130 of the Municipal Act, Chapter 25, S.O. 2001, provides that a
municipality may regulate matters related to the health, safety, and well-being of the
inhabitants of the municipality;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, SO. 1999 Chapter 14, Schedule C did
incorporate, as of January 1st, 2001, the municipality of the "City of Hamilton";
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, provides that the By-laws of the former
municipalities continue in force and effect in the City of Hamilton until subsequently
amended or repealed by the Council of the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS the Council for the City of Hamilton deems it expedient to enact a
single By-law to provide for the removal of snow and ice from roofs and sidewalks, in
place of By-laws of the former area municipalities;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council for the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Definitions
1. In this By-law,
(a) "City" means the City of Hamilton;
(b) "Council" means the council for the City of Hamilton;
(c) "Consecutive winter storm events" refers to any precipitation and/or
accumulation of snow or ice from the beginning of the original winter snow
event, and any subsequent storm events occurring within a 24 hour period
of the cessation of the previous storm event;
(d) "Director" means the Director of the Operations and Maintenance Division
of the Public Works Department for the City, and includes his designate
and successor;
(e) "Highway" means a common and public highway under the jurisdiction of
the City of Hamilton, and includes a street, sidewalk, boulevard whether
paved or not paved, an unopened road allowance, and any portion of the
land situated between street lines;
By-law No. 03-296 Page 2
(f) “Winter Storm Event” refers to any precipitation and/or accumulation of
snow or ice.
2. In this By-law, whenever a word imparts the masculine gender it is deemed to
include the feminine gender;
3. In this By-law, the singular sense is deemed to be inclusive and interchangeable
with the plural sense
Application of By-law
4. The provisions of this By-law shall apply to all lands within the boundaries of the
City, except for those areas designated as being exempt by the Director.
General Duties, Obligations, and Prohibitions
5. That every occupant or owner shall, within 24 hours of the cessation of a Winter
Storm Event, or within 24 hours of the cessation of a series of Consecutive winter
storm events, remove and clear all snow and ice from sidewalks abutting the
highways in front of, or along side, or at the rear of any occupied or unoccupied
lot, or vacant lot;
6. All owners or occupants of buildings where the roof or eaves of which abut or
overhang the highway or sidewalk upon the highway shall, whenever ice or snow
accumulates on the roof or eaves, remove the same immediately, and in a
manner showing due care and precaution for the safety of persons passing.
7. No owner or occupant shall throw, place, bring, or deposit snow or ice:
(a) On or immediately adjacent to a fire hydrant, or in any manner that
obstructs access to a fire hydrant;
(b) On or adjacent to a travelled portion of the highway, or in such a manner
so as to interfere with the safe passage of vehicles, or pedestrians, or
obstruct the visibility of vehicle operators or pedestrians
(c) In such a manner so as to obstruct drainage to any drain or sewer
8. That if the owner or occupant fails, neglects, or refuses to comply with Sections
5, 6, and 7 of this By-law, the Director in lieu of, or in addition to any other
remedy provided by this By-law, is authorized to have the snow or ice to be
removed at the expense of the owner or occupant, and in the case of non-
payment, such expenses may be recovered in a like manner as municipal taxes.
Enforcement
9. Any Police Officer, Municipal Law Enforcement Officer, or employee of the City
designated by the Director for the purpose of this Section is authorized to inform
any person of the provisions of this By-law and to request compliance therewith;
10. Any Police Officer, Municipal Law Enforcement Officer, or employee of the City
designated by the Director for the purpose of this Section is authorized to order
any person believed by such Officer or employee to be in contravention of this
By-law to desist from the activity consisting or contributing to such contravention;
Penalty
11. Any person contravening any provision of this By-law is guilty of an offence and
upon conviction, is liable to such penalty as provided for under the Provincial
Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, Chapter P.33, as amended.
Severance
12. Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare any part or whole of any
provision of this By-law to be invalid or of no force and effect, the provision or
part shall be deemed to have been severed from this By-law, and it is the
intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law survive and be applied and
enforced in accordance with the terms to the extent possible under law.
Short Title
13. The short title of this By-law shall be "The Snow Removal By-law".
Repeals and Enactment
14. That By-law 88-152-S (Flamborough), By-law 86-77 (Hamilton) Section 7, By-law
4114-93 (Dundas), By-law 434-90 (Glanbrook), By-law 4477-96 (Stoney Creek),
and By-law R77-109 (Regional Roads By-law) Section 7 be repealed.
15. Any references to By-laws 88-152-S, 86-77, 4114-93, 434-90, 4477-96, and R77-
109, as amended, antedating the passing and enactment of this By-law shall be
deemed a reference to this By-law.
16. This By-law shall come into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 15TH day of October, 2003.
R. E. Wade K. Christenson
_________________________ __________________________
MAYOR CLERK



Content from 04091 adequate heat bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 6, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 04-008 (PD04117)
CM: April 28, 2004
Bill No. 091
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-091
ADEQUATE HEAT BY-LAW
Being a by-law to Require the Supply of Adequate and Suitable Heat for
Rental Residential Premises
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-laws listed
on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience only and is not the
official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate reference to the By-law, certified copies should be
obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
1
CITY OF HAMILTON
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 04-091
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-law No.: Effective Date Report No.:
16-231 August 12, 2016 Report 16-014 (PED16162)
2
Item 6, Planning & Economic
Development Committee
Report 04-008 (PD04117)
CM: April 28, 2004
Bill No. 091
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-091
Being a By-law To:
Require the Supply of Adequate and Suitable Heat for
Rental Residential Premises
WHEREAS Council deems it necessary to enact a by-law to require the supply of
heat to rental residential premises;
AND WHEREAS The lack of heat in rental premises during cold weather may put
substantial strain on public and charitable resources, particularly shelters;
AND WHEREAS Sections 2, 8 through 11, 125 and 427 of the Municipal Act, S.
0. 2001 Chapter 25, as amended, provide for the Council of a Municipality to pass by-
laws for purposes which include the provision of services and things necessary and
desirable for the municipality and fostering the current and future economic, social and
environmental well-being of the municipality, and powers which include the authority to
regulate, prohibit and impose requirements on persons, and to differentiate between
persons, and specifically to enact by-laws dealing with structures and the use and
installation of heating appliances, and for the carrying out of requirements at the
expense of the person and collection of such costs through the tax roll or by other
means;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999 Statutes of Ontario, 1999 Chap.
14, Schedule C, did incorporate, as of January 2001, the municipality “City of
Hamilton”;
NOW, THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
3
SHORT TITLE
This By-law may be cited as the “Adequate Heat By-law”.
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
In this By-law,
(a) “adequate and suitable heat” means the maintenance of an air
temperature of at least twenty degrees Celsius (20°C) in all habitable
spaces, by a safe, operable and permanent heating appliance capable of
maintaining that temperature;
(b) “City” means as the context requires, the geographic area of the City of
Hamilton or the municipal corporation of that name;
(c) “Director” means the Director of Building and Licensing of the City or the
Director’s
(d) “habitable space“ means any room in a dwelling used or intended to be
used for living, eating, sleeping or cooking and without limiting the
foregoing shall include a den, library, recreational room,
washroom or toilet room or a combination of such rooms, but which term
shall not include a room or space used solely as a laundry room, pantry,
closet, communicating corridor, stairway, boiler room, mechanical room,
garage designed for the parking of motor vehicles, elevator shaft or a
space reserved for the buildings service or maintenance;
(e) “Inspector” means the persons listed in section of this by-law;
(f)
“Landlord” includes the person for the time being managing the premises
or entitled to receive or receiving rent payments for the land or premises,
whether on the person’s own account or as agent or trustee of any other
person;
“permanent” in relation to a heating appliance means an appliance other
than a temporary heating device;
(h) “Property Owner” means the registered owner of the land;
(i) “regulated institution or care premises” means a hospital, medical or
care institution, or a penal or detention facility which includes living
accommodation but which is licensed, approved or supervised by a
Province of Ontario or Government of Canada authority or agency in
respect of the provision of services or care;
4
“rental residential premises” means any structure rented as a dwelling,
boarding or lodging house, or for living accommodation for persons, and
including structures with wheels or which may be made mobile by the re-
attachment of wheels or other connections, but does not include any
regulated institution or care premises;
“temporary heating device” includes an electric heating device which
plugs into or is intended to be plugged into an electrical outlet, and any
heating device or appliance designed to be portable;
“tenancy agreement” includes a lease or rental agreement; and
includes a lessee or other person occupying premises under a
tenancy agreement.
APPLICATION OF BY-LAW
This by-law does not require adequate and suitable heat in spaces which are not
habitable spaces.
This by-law shall not be interpreted so as to limit the temperature preference of a
Tenant or to require the Tenant to set a thermostat within their dwelling or living
accommodation at or above the required temperature, except only as may be
reasonably necessary to permit a measurement to be taken or to establish
operation of a heating appliance, and further this by-law shall not be interpreted
so as to require a Tenant to use temporary heating devices in the premises or
part to meet the Property Owners or Landlords obligations under this by-law.
ADEQUATE AND SUITABLE HEAT
3. A Property Owner and the Landlord of rental residential premises shall provide a
supply of adequate and suitable heat to habitable spaces within the premises or
parts thereof and no Property Owner or Landlord shall cause or permit the lack of
adequate and suitable heat to habitable spaces within the premises or parts
thereof.
EXCEPTIONS
4. Section 3 does not apply;
(a) between the dates of May 15 and September 15 in a single calendar year,
both dates inclusive; or
(b) to a lack of heat arising from the failure of a Tenant to pay for a required
service which is the cause of the lack of heat, where the Tenant is
obligated by a tenancy agreement to pay for the required service.
[As Amended: By-law 16-231, s.1]
5
MEASUREMENT OF TEMPERATURES
For greater certainty the measurement of temperatures to determine compliance
with the requirement for adequate and suitable heat, will be a measurement of air
temperature at 1.5 meters above floor level and 1 meter from a wall in the space.
For greater certainty the provisions of subsection and section 3 mean that
measurement of temperature to determine compliance with this by-law shall be
taken with the thermostat set at or above the specified temperature, and without
the assistance of any temporary heating device.
NOTICE
Notice of Non-Compliance: Where an Inspector is satisfied that a contravention of
this by-law has occurred, the Inspector may cause to issue a notice for the
purpose of advising the Property Owner or Landlord, and the notice shall set out:
(a) the municipal address or the legal description of the land; and
(b) reasonable particulars of the contravention and the period within which
there must be compliance; and
(c) a notice stating that if compliance is not achieved within the period it
specifies, the City may have the work done at the expense of the Property
Owner or Landlord and be collected as property taxes or by action from
such persons.
Service of Notice: An notice made under subsection may be served
personally, by prepaid ordinary mail to the Property Owners or Landlords last
known address, or by placard as provided below, and Council deems such notice
to be sufficient, and in the case of service by mail, deemed sufficient five days
from the date such notice was mailed.
Placard: A notice or order where placed by placard shall be placed on the
premises in a conspicuous place on the land and the Director, an Inspector, or
their agents may enter the land for this purpose, which shall be deemed by
Council to be sufficient service of the notice.
Work Order: Where the Director is satisfied that a Property Owner or Landlord
has failed to supply adequate and suitable heat in the premises within the time
specified in a notice, the Director may give or cause to be given reasonable
notice to the Property Owner or Landlord that the City intends to have work or
repairs carried out to correct the contravention at the Property Owner or
Landlords expense.
Service of Work Order: Before the City or its agents enters on land to do the work
specified in subsection the work order shall be served on such persons
required to have notice under the Municipal Act who may be affected by the work
or repair on the premises, in the manner or manners specified.
6
ENFORCEMENT
The administration and enforcement of this by-law shall be performed by the
Director, a deputy or acting director, a building inspector or a municipal law
enforcement officer appointed under any by-law of the City, as may be employed
by the City or assigned to enforce this by-law by the Director.
No person shall hinder or obstruct, or attempt to hinder or obstruct any Inspector
or person acting on the City’s behalf in exercising a power or performing a duty
under this by-law or under the Municipal Act provisions relevant to this by-law,
and no person but an Inspector shall remove a notice or order of the City placed
on the premises pursuant to this by-law.
If the Property Owner or Landlord fails to do work required under this by-law, in
addition to any other action the City may take or other remedy it may have the
City or the City’s agents may at any reasonable time and at the Property Owner
and Landlords expense, in the manner provided for in the Municipal Act, 2001,
S.O. 2001, c. 25 including interest at the rate specified there on costs incurred,
may carry out repairs or work as are necessary to bring the premises into
compliance with the cost of repairs not to exceed twenty thousand dollars
Where the costs of bringing the property into compliance exceed the amount
authorized by the City may carry out repairs to a greater amount or manner
as may be approved by Council.
Costs incurred by the City under this section together with interest accrued or
accruing may be collected by action, or be added to the tax roll of property of the
Property Owner or Landlord and collected in the same manner as taxes.
PENALTY
9. Every person who contravenes a provision of this by-law is guilty of an offence,
and upon conviction is liable to the penalties provided for in section 61 of the
Provincial Offences Act, R. S. 0. 1990, c. P.33.
REPEAL AND ENACTMENT
10. The following By-laws, all as may be amended, of the named former area
municipalities are hereby repealed:
(a) By-law No. 76-31-H (Flamborough);
(b) By-law No. 4234-95 (Stoney Creek); and
(c) By-law No. 2838-76 (Dundas).
7
11. This by-law comes into force and effect upon the date of enactment.
PASSED and ENACTED this day of April, 2004
6



Content from 04280 to amend property standards bylaw no 03117pdf:
Authority: Item13, Planning and Economic
Development Committee
Report; 04-020 (PD04284)
CM; November 10, 2004
Bill No. 280
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-280
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-117 Respecting:
PEST CONTROL
WHEREAS By-law No. 03-117 provides for property standards and
Council deems it necessary to provide for the amendments dealing with pest
control;
AND WHEREAS Section 15.1(3) of the Building Code Act, S. O. 1992, c.
23 contains the jurisdiction for municipalities to enact by-laws prescribing
standards for the maintenance and occupancy of property;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton, in adopting Item 13 (a)
of Report 04-020 of the Planning and Economic Development Committee at its
meeting held on the 10th day of November, 2004, recommended that By-law No.
03-117 be amended as hereinafter provided;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 2(1) of By-law No. 03-117 is hereby amended, by adding the
following definitions, immediately after clause (ee):
“(ff) “pest” means any mouse, rat, bed bug, flea, wasp, hornet or
cockroach, but does not include any domesticated mouse or rat; and
(gg) “domesticated mouse or rat” means a mouse or rat kept as a pet by
the occupants of one dwelling unit, normally in an enclosed cage or
container within the unit, which is cared for and fed by the occupants,
which care includes clean up and removal of mouse or rat waste and
soiled rodent bedding from the dwelling unit and cage or container, and
which animal is kept in compliance with any animal control laws or by-
laws.”
By-law respecting Pest Control 2
2. Clause (s) of Subsection 2(1) of By-law No. 03-117 is hereby further
amended by adding the words “and, for the purposes of subsection 34a
only, a health inspector” after the words “building inspector” in the fourth
line.
3. By-law No. 03-1 17 is hereby amended adding the following section:
“PEST CONTROL
34a(l) Every dwelling, multiple dwelling and dwelling unit shall be kept
free of infestation by pests.
34a(2) For the purposes of subsection 34a(l) an “infestation” includes the
presence of one rat or mouse, and in the case of insects means the
presence of more than one such insect, and in the case of wasps or
hornets includes the presence of any occupied nest interior or if attached
to the exterior of the structure.”
4. Paragraph (a) of Clause 3 (Vermin), in Section 707 (Miscellaneous
Nuisances) of By-law No. 4798 of the Corporation of the City of Hamilton
is hereby repealed.
5. In all other respects, By-laws Nos. 03-1 17 and former Corporation of the
City of Hamilton By-law No. 4798 are hereby confirmed without change.
6. This By-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 10th day of November, 2004



Content from 04281 to amend bylaw no 03117 and no 03118pdf:
Authority: Item13(b), Planning and
Economic Development
Committee Report; 04-020
(PD04284)
CM: November 10, 2004
Bill No. 281
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-281
To Amend By-Law No. 03-117 and No. 03-118
Respecting:
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND STANDARDS
WHEREAS By-law No.03-117 provides for property standards and By-law
No. 03-118 provides for yard maintenance standards, and Council deems it
necessary to provide for the repeal of by-laws previously passed by former area
municipal councils on the same subject matters, and to make other
housekeeping changes to By-laws No. 03-117 and No. 03-118;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton, in adopting Item 13 (b)
of Report 04-020 of the Planning and Economic Development Committee at its
meeting held on the 10th day of November, 2004, recommended that By-laws No.
03-117 and 03-118 be amended as hereinafter provided;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. By-law No. 3946-91 as amended, as enacted by the former Corporation of
the Town of Dundas, is hereby repealed.
2. By-law No. 90-96-P as amended, as enacted by the former Corporation of
the Town of Flamborough, is hereby repealed.
3. Section 4 of the By-law No. 03-118 is hereby amended, immediately after
subsection 4(1), by deleting the numbers and symbols “4. 4(2)” and
replacing them with “4(2)”.
4. Subsection 2(1) of By-law No. 03-117 is hereby amended, by adding “(t)”
immediately before the definition of “owner”.
5. Subsection 2(1) of By-law No. 03-117 is hereby further amended by
deleting the period (“.”) after the word “Hamilton” in clause (e).
6. Subsection 38(2) of By-law No. 03-1 17 is hereby amended by repealing
the words “this Act” in the last line, and replacing them with the words
“The Building Code Act, S. 0. 1992, c. 23.”
7. Subsection 40(3) of By-law No. 03-117 is hereby amended by adding a
semicolon (“;”) at the end of clause (a).
8. Schedule “B” to By-law 03-117 is hereby amended by repealing the
names and terms of members listed there, and replacing them with the
following names and terms of the members of the Property Standards
Committee:
“Irene Hubar, term to expire November 30, 2004
Fabrizio L. Angelici, term to expire November 30, 2005
Cindy Ashenden, term to expire November 30,2005
David Ricketts, term to expire November 30, 2006
Bruce Duncan, term to expire November 30,2006”
9. In all other respects, By-laws No. 03-117 and No. 03-118 are hereby
confirmed without change.
10. This By-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED AND ENACTED this low d ay of November , 2004
*
MAY‘



Content from 04318 to amend the sewer use bylaw 04150 and implement the 2005 sewer use fees and chargespdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committeeof the Whole
Report; 04-0 14
( FCSO4?5 01PW04127)
CM: December 15,04
Bill No. 318
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-318
TO AMEND THE SEWER USE BY-LAW 04-150, AS AMENDED,
AND IMPLEMENT THE 2005 SEWER USE FEES AND CHARGES.
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law 04-15 0, known and referred to as the “Sewer Use By-law”, which
By-law came into force and effect on June 30,2004.
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 15th day of December, 2004, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 04-014 and did
authorize the 2005 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including the
sewer use fees and charges set out herein;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts asfollows:
1. That Schedule “ D to By-law No. 04-150, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “ Da ttached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2005.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 04-150, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmedas unchanged.
PASSEDAND ENACTEDt his 15" day of December, 2004.
Mayor
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVEJ ANUARY tT 2, 0 05
(REFERRED TO IN SECTIONS 4,7 AND 8)
1. For an annual fee permit to discharge hauled sewage $51.25*
-
2. Permit refund service charge Sewers $20.50"
3. Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
(a)
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
Volume of Haulec
Up to 1000 imperial
gallons or anypart any part thereof $ 39.10* $39.1 O*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 39.10" $78.20*
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial mJ
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $78.20* $1 17.30"
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial mJ
aallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $1 17.30* $195.50*
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial mJ
gallons
Greater than 8000
imperial gallons but $156.38* $234.60*
less than or equal to
10000 imperial
aallons
*Includes GST
Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated outside the City of
(b)
Hamilton:
Fee for all discharges
from outside the City:
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant and non-
compliant
I up
up to 1000 imperial to 4.54 m’or any part
- .
gallons or any part thereof $ 78.20*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 15.9 $ 156.39*
less than or equal to m3
3500 imperial gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9 m’ but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 22.7 $ 234.60*
less than or equal to m3
5000 imperial gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 36.3 $390.99*
less than or equal to m3
8000 imperial gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to $469.25*
less than or equal to 45.43 m3
10000 imperial gallons
c) Holding Tanks of RecreationalVehicles $ 5.10*
4. Overstrength Discharge Fees and Compliance Program Fees
Parameter Fee (centdkg)
B.O.D. $0.5829 plus GST
Suspended Solids $0.4663 plus GST
Phenolic Compounds $0.5829 plus GST
Solvent Extractable Matter $0.4896 plus GST
Kjeldahl Nitrogen $1.7751 plus GST
Phosphorus $1.2488 plus GST
*Includes GST
5
5. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $239.49 plus GST
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $239.49 plus GST
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $239.49 plus GST
6. Information Requests $1 10.14 plus GST



Content from 04319 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
'
} ,f
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 04-014
( FCS04150/PW04127)
CM: December 15, 04
Bill No. 319
CITY OF HAMILT ON
BY-LAW NO. 04-319
TO AMEND THE WATERWORKS BY-LAW R84-026, AS AMENDED,
AND IMPLEMENT THE 2005 WATER FEES AND CHARGES
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by
law respecting the management and maintenance qf the waterworks. system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 15th day of December, 2004, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 04-014 and did
authorize the 2005 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including but
not limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
2
1. That Schedule "A" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule "A" attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That Schedule "C" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule "C" attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
3. That Schedule "E" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule "E" attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
4. That Schedule "G" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule "G" attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
5. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of the 1st day of
January, 2005.
6. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 15th day of December, 2004.
dff¢---·
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE "A" TO BY-LAW NO. R84-026, AS AMENDED
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2005
Water: City of Hamilton (geographic area of the former City of Hamilton
and the former City of Stoney Creek as at December 31, 2000)
$289.08 per annum
Note: Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Rate 100% of non-metered water
rate
)
4
SCHEDULE "C" TO BY-LAW R84-026, AS AMENDED
MISCELLANEOUS RA TES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1. 2005
(Referred to in Section 12(6), (7) and (8))
1. Travelling Shows and Other Temporary Occasions
The deposit required from travelling shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Hundred Dollars ($512.50), and consists of:
(a) Two Hundred Dollars ($205.00) as a usage deposit (to be applied to
the cost of temporary connection/disconnection, the per diem rental
cost for the hydrant adapter and the amount due for water used); and
(b) Three Hundred Dollars ($307.50) as a damage deposit (refundable
upbn return to the City of the hydrant adapter).
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 13 of Schedule "E" to this By
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
2. Public Water Filling Stations
The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water Filling
Stations be $1.19 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public Water Filling
Stations are located at:
(i) Shaver Road, Ancaster
(ii) Dartnall Road, Hamilton
3. Private Water Filling Stations
The one time permit fee for new private water filling stations approved by the
General Manager of Transportation, Operations and Environment is $350.00
and is payable upon permit application.
The annual permit fee for both existing private water filling stations and new
private water filling stations approved by the General Manager of
Transportation, Operations and Environment is $150.00 and is payable
within one month of the notification by the City.
)
5
4. Areas Outside the City of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G" to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
6
SCHEDULE "E" TO BY-LAW R84-026, AS AMENDED
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2005
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $51.25
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in Section 4(1)(b) of Regional By-law
R84-026, as amended, as of January 23, 2002:
,~ize of Water Meter Fee
16 mm diameter $ 260.35
20 mm diameter 302.35
25 mm diameter 500.20
38 mm diameter 793.35
50 mm diameter 971.70
100 mm diameter (turbine) 2,193.50
100 mm diameter (compound) 4,256.80
150 mm diameter (turbine) 4,327.55
150 mm diameter ( compound) 8,547.45
200 mm diameter (turbine) 6,271.95
)
7
(c) Fees for supply and installation of water meter and remote reading device
under Universal Metering Program as of December 22, 2001:
Size of Water Meter Fee
16 mm diameter $ 239.85
20 mm diameter 266.50
25 mm diameter 350.55
38 mm diameter 681.60
Greater than 38 mm diameter Construction costs plus
$22.00 administration
charge
The fees payable under the Universal Metering Program by Owners of single-family
residential properties may be paid to the City either in full or over a five year period,
interest free, on the utility bill, with the option to repay all or part of those costs
before the end of the five year period once the billing account has been
established.
2. Permit refund service charge - water *** $20.50
3. For superintending the laying of a new water service
a) Regular Inspection $48.15
b) Complex Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $48.15
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
4. For superintending the laying of the water service
after normal working hours $ 71.75
5. For turning water off $48.15
6. For turning water on $48.15
7. For turning water on & off during the same call $57.40
8. For turning water off and on due to non-payment (penalty extra) $96.35
9. For each Special Water Service to be connected as
referred to in Section 4(18) of this By-law $1,778.35
10. Discharge of Special Water Service Agreements $215.25
·,
J
8
11. Processing of Special Water Service Agreements $404.85
12. Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes $61.50
13. (a) For temporary connections and disconnections*
Size of Water Meter Usage Cost+
Connection/Disconnection
Fee
15 mm - 25 mm diameter Metered Water Rate+
$61.50
38 mm - 50 mm diameter Metered Water Rate+
$90.20
100 mm diameter or greater Metered Water Rate+
$277.75
(b) For additional temporary connections and disconnections $102.50/visit
(After Hours either visit)
(c) Additional per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental $1.00/day
14. For poor pressure flow tests ** $25.60
15. Replacement Cost for Lost Meter:
Size of Meter Cost 8%PST& Total
7%GST
16 mm diameter $ 75.59 $ 11.34 $ 86.93
20 mm diameter 111.73 16.75 128.48
25 mm diameter 138.58 20.79 159.37
38 mm diameter 309.10 46.36 355.46
50 mm diameter 412.54 61.88 474.42
100 mm diameter (turbine) 1,281.25 192.19 1,473.44
100 mm diameter 2,316.50 347.48 2,663.98
(compound)
150 mm diameter (turbine) 2,357.50 353.63 2,711.13
9
200 mm diameter (turbine) 3,485.00 522.75 4,007.75
200 mm diameter 6,355.00 953.25 7,308.25
(compound)
250 mm diameter (turbine) 6,765.00 1014.75 7,779.75
16. Seasonal Water Meter:
15 mm to 25 mm diameter $61.50
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $90.20
100 mm plus diameter $284.95
17. Pool Charges-
supplying water to pools having a capacity of more than
5 cu.m. an annual charge of $59.45
18. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $ 93.25
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $142.45
75 mm to 250 mm diameter $325.95
19. Repair of broken meter · labour + parts ( +GST)
20. For service calls other than previously specified $55.85
21. Service Call (After Hours) $71.75
22. Service Fee for each missed appointment $96.35
or inspection not ready and completed follow-up
inspection
23. Meter Open By-pass $307.50
24. Watermain Service Thawing - serviced by external contractor cost plus 33%
25. Renewal of any permit set out in this Schedule "E" $32.25
which has expired
10
26. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs)
27. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge cost plus 33%
. 28. Processing of Landscaping Lease Arrangements $404.85
29. Rental Rate for Landscaping Lease (Per Annum) Case Dependent
No set fee
30. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - No Field Inspection $117.85
31. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - Field Inspection $166.05
* This service requires a $512.50 deposit ($205.00 usage deposit and $307.50
damage deposit)
** This charge is applicable only on properties tested which
have adequate water pressure flows and wish to be retested.
*** A service charge applies for each refund issued.
11
SCHEDULE "G" TO BY-LAW R84-026, AS AMENDED
TABLE OF METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2005
(Referred to in Section 12(2), (3) & (4) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Charge
The minimum charge per billing period, which constitutes a basic charge,
including the use of the specified volume of water is as follows:
Residential Approved Minimum Approved Minimum
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Rate Volume/Bi- Monthly rate Volume/Month
Monthly
15 mm to20 mm $11.36 10 m3 $5.68 5m3
Commercial, Approved Bi- Minimum Approved Minimum
Institutional & Monthly Rate Volume/Bi- Monthly Rate Volume/Month
Industrial Meter Monthly
Size
16mm $ 11.36 10
m3
$ 5.68
5m3
·
3 3
20mm 11.36 10 m 5.68 5m
25mm 60.08 30m'3 30.04 15 m3
3 3
38mm 66.74 30 m 33.37 15m
3 3
50mm 79.36 30 m 39.68 15 m
3 3
75mm 137.48 30m 68.74 15 m
100mm 176.12 30 m3 88.06 15 m3
150mm 311.62 30m3 155.81 15 m3
200mm 538.06 30 m3 269.03 15 m3
250mm 828.36 30 m3 414.18 15 m3
Haldimand Meter Approved Bi- Minimum Volume Approved Minimum
Size Monthly Rate Bi-Monthly Monthly Rate Volume/Month
100mm $264.16 30 m3 $132.08 15 m3
150mm 467.44 30 m3 233.72 15 m3
200mm 807.08 30 m3 403.54 15 m3
12
8) Consumption Rate
The consumption charge for the amount of water used over and above the
specified volume included in the Bi-Monthly Minimum Charge is as follows:
Type of Water Service Specified Volume Included in Consumption Charge per Cubic
Billed Minimum Bi-Monthly Metre
Charge
Residential 10 m3 $0. 792 > 10 m3
Small Commercial 10 m3 $0.792 > 10 m3
Commercial, Institutional & 30 m3 $0.792 > 30 m3
Industrial (including Private Water
Filling Stations approved by the
City}
Haldimand & Public Water Filling 30m3 $1.189 > 30 m3
Stations
C) WASTEWATER SURCHARGE RATE IS 100% OF WATER
CONSUMPTION*
*(1) Applies to all metered residential, commercial, industrial and institutional
water consumption.



Content from 04320 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw 03272 and implement the 2005 fe:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 04-014
( FCSO415O/PWO4127)
CM: December 15,04
Bill No. 320
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 04-320
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272 and Implement the 2005
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003 the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 15th day of December, 2004, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 04-014 and did
authorize the 2005 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “B” attached to this by-law be substituted therefore.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2005.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this day of December, 2004.
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
Initial Application Processing Fee $10 2.50 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
Supplementary Application Fee $307.50 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and Full Cost
Recovery for peer review
Annual Administration Fee (where $410 .00 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22( b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: EYO=/A-D)XIOO
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005)
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
4
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; and for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: GxF%=H
Step 6: HxI=$J



Content from 05099 to amend bylaw no 01219 as amended to manage and regulate municipal parkspdf:
Authorty: Item 12, Public Works, Infrastructure,
and Environment Committee
Report 05-007 (PW05046)
27, 2005
CM: April
Bil No. 099
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-099
To Amend City of Hamilton By-Law 01-219, as amended,
Being a By.;law To Manage and Regulate Municipal Parks
WHEREAS Section 11 (1)5 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, Chapter 25, as
amended, provides that single tier municipalities may pass by-laws respecting matters
within the sphere of jurisdiction including; "Culture, parks, recreation and heritage";
AND WHEREAS the Council for the City of Hamilton, on the 18th day of September
2001, did pass and enact City of Hamilton By-law 01-219, being a by-law Manage and
Regulate Municipal Parks, pursuant to Section 191(6) of The Municipal Act, R.S.O.
1990, Chapter MA5, as amended;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to amend by-law 01-219, as amended.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. By-law 01-219,as amended, is hereby amended by repealing subsections U)
and (k) of Section 1 thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such
subsections the following:
"General Manager" means the General Manager of the Public Works
"0)
Department for the City of Hamilton and includes his or her designate or
designates and successor;
(k) "Leash Free Park" means a park, or a designated area within a park, or a
public open space set aside as an area where dogs are not required to be
leashed or otherwise restrained;"
2. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 3
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"(1) No person shall enter into or be in any park, except during the times the
park is open to the public or during such times as otherwise expressly
authorized by permit.
(2) A park shall only be open to the public:
(a) where there is displayed at, within or adjacent to a park a posted
sign or notice as to the times such park is open to the public, during
the times so indicated on such sign or notice; or
(b) in the absence of a posted sign or notice as referred to in
subsection 3(2)(a), a park shall only be open to the public each day
from six o'clock in the forenoon (6:00 a.m.) until eleven o'clock in
the afternoon (11 :00 p.m.)."
3. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 6
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such subsection the following:
"6. While in a park, no person shall be in possession of or use any firearm,
air gun, bow and arrow, axe or offensive weapon of any kind unless
expressly authorized by permit, provided that this prohibition shall not
apply to a Police Offcer, an employee of the City, or such other persons
as are providing contractual services to the City requiring the use of such
weapons, while engaged in the performance of their duties."
4. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing
subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f) of Section 8 thereof and substituting in
the place and stead of such subsection the following:
"8. No person shall, in any park, unless expressly authorized by permit:
(a) climb or descend any natural formation, including but not limited to
a cliff, precipice, rock face, overhang, or gorge, or any building,
structure or equipment, unless such equipment or structure is
specifically created, designed or erected for the purpose of
climbing;
(b) break, injure, deface, move or remove the whole or any part of any
flowers, plant material, trees or other vegetation or any building,
structure, equipment or other property of the City;
move, remove, excavate, disturb, alter, damage, or cause the
(c)
deterioration or erosion of, the whole or any part of rocks,
boulders, rock faces, soil, sand, wood, or like substance, or any
other property or thing;
in any manner, disturb ground which is under repair, prepared for
(d)
planting, has been newly seeded or sodded, or is in an area
posted to that effect;
(e) conduct archaeological research, or remove any relic, artifact or
natural object;
(f) drive, park or walk in any area posted to prohibit same."
5. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing subsection
(d) of Section 9 thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such
subsection the following:
"(d) dispose of, cause the release of, dump, drain or discharge any
material or substance, whether solid or liquid and whether toxic,
hazardous (as defined by the Environmental Protection Act, R.S.O.
1990, as amended) or otherwise, on or into any soil or the waters of
any pool, pond, lake, stream, fountain or watercourse, regardless of
the place of origin and the means of transmission or transportation of
said material or substance, unless expressly authorized by permit;"
6. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 10
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"10. While in any park, unless expressly authorized by permit, no person shall:
(a) subject to the provisions of Section 22, kil, attempt to kil, maim,
injure, trap, remove or disturb any animal, bird, waterfowl, worm, or
other wildlife; or
(b) touch, disturb, injure or remove any nest, or any egg therefrom;"
7. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 12
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"12. (a) Unless expressly authorized by permit, no person shall encroach
upon or take possession of any park, or any part or area within a
park, by any means whatsoever, including but not limited to the
placing, construction, installation or maintenance of any fence,
structure or other thing, the dumping or storage of any materials, or
by planting any plant or otherwise cultivating, grooming or
landscaping any part of the grounds thereof;
(b) Where the Director determines that an encroachment upon a part or
area of a park will be reasonable in the circumstances and will not
be detrimental to the interests of the City, the Director may authorize
by permit an encroachment upon a part or area of a park, upon such
terms and conditions as the Director may deem appropriate in the
circumstances, and may take or require to be taken such measures
or actions as the Director deems reasonable to ensure that any
authorized encroachments are and continue to be satisfactory to the
City;
(c) The Director is authorized to remove or cause to be removed, and to
dispose of or cause to be disposed of, any unauthorized or no
longer authorized encroachment from any park by any means and in
any manner whatsoever, as the Director may, in the exercise of an
absolute discretion, deem appropriate in the circumstances,
including but not limited to the issuance of an order to remove an
encroachment against the person or persons responsible for the
encroachment.
(d) No person, responsible for an authorized encroachment, shall fail to
comply with the terms and conditions of the permit authorizing such
encroachment
(e) No person responsible for an encroachment shall fail to remove an
encroachment, when directed or ordered by the Director, where
such encroachment is not authorized or no longer authorized by
permit.
In the event that a person or persons, against whom an order to
(f)
remove an encroachment from a park has been made or issued by
the Director, fails to comply with said order within the time indicated
on the order, the Director may cause the encroachment to be
removed and disposed of, all at the expense of such person or
persons and the amount of such expense may be recovered by the
City by action or may be added by the City Clerk to the collectots
roil against any lands within the City of Hamilton owned by such
person or persons and collected in a like manner as municipal
taxes. "
8. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing
subsections (1) and (2) of Section 13 thereof;
9. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 14
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"14. While in any park, unless expressly authorized by permit or in a permitted
area designated by posted signs, no person shall;
(a) light, build or stoke an open fire or bonfire or move, alter, or expand
authorized fire pit locations;
(b) use any solid, liquid or gas fuelled portable barbecue, and, under no
circumstances shall the fuel tank, cylinder or container for use with a
liquid or gas fuelled barbecue exceed twenty (20) pounds capacity;
(c) use fuel other than charcoal or briquettes in any stationary
barbeque; or,
(d) leave a barbecue or fire unattended without first extinguishing the
barbecue or fire and ensuring that any remaining embers, coals,
ashes or other residue, are fully extinguished and cold."
10. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 15
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"Organized Gatherings, Picnics, and Group Photography
15. Unless expressly authorized by permit, no person while in any park shall:
(a) hold a picnic, public meeting, or other organized gathering or event
of more than twenty persons; or
(b) interfere with a picnic, organized gathering or event authorized by
permit; or '
(c) engage in group photography involving more than ten persons."
11. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 29
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"29. No person shall enter, walk, or play upon or otherwise use any area or part
thereof in any park, designated for the purpose of playing tennis, or any
area enclosed as a tennis court or tennis courts, except in accordance with
the posted rules and regulations, unless otherwise expressly authorized by
permit."
12. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing
subsections (2), (8) and (11) of Section 32 thereof and substituting in the place
and stead of such subsections the following:
Park or leave a vehicle, except during the times the park is open to the
"(2)
public, as defined in Section 3 of By-Law 01-219 as amended herein, or in
a designated area allowing for such overnight parking, or during such times
otherwise expressly authorized by permit, provided that such authorization
is clearly displayed in the driver's side front windshield of the vehicle in
such a manner as to be readable from the exterior of the vehicle;
(8) Park or stop a vehicle in any area or parking space except while actively
using the park, or unless expressly authorized by permit, provided that
such authorization is clearly displayed in the driver's side front windshield of
the vehicle in such a manner as to be readable from the exterior of the
vehicle;
Park a vehicle for a period of time longer than the posted time limit, if any,
(11 )
unless expressly authorized by permit, provided that such authorization is
clearly displayed in the drivets side front windshield of the vehicle in such a
manner as to be readable from the exterior of the vehicle."
13. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing subsection
(1) of Section 33 thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such
subsections the following:
"33(1) washing, cleaning, servicing, maintaining or, except in the event of an
emergency, the repair of any vehicle, unless expressly authorized by
permit."
14. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 35
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such subsections the
following:
"35. No person shall ride, drive, park or be in possession or control of a
motorized recreational vehicle in any park except in a designated area or
when expressly authorized by permit."
15. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing
subsections (3), and (4) of Section 40 thereof and substituting in the place and
stead of such subsections the following:
A dog within a designated "Leash Free Park" shall be deemed not to be at
"(3)
large.
(4) The provisions of subsections (1 )(a) and (2)(a) of Section 40 shall not apply
to a Police work dog under the control of a Police Offcer, or to a working
dog under the control of an employee of the City, or under the control of
such agents or contractors as may be providing contractual services to the
City, which services require dogs to run off leash, and only while engaged
in the performance of the duties required by the agreement with the City."
16. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing subsection
in the place and stead of such
(2) of Section 41 thereof and substituting
subsections the following:
Subject to Sections 39 and 40, no person shall bring or permit to be
"(2)
brought any livestock into any park, except where expressly authorized by
and in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit authorizing
such livestock to be upon specified park lands."
17. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing
subsections (b) and (d) of Section 43 thereof and substituting in the place and
stead of such subsections the following:
"(b) for a period longer than one (1 ) hour;
without prior payment of the requisite fee or fees, if any, approved by
(d)
Council"
18. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing
subsections (2) and (3) of Section 44 thereof and substituting in the place and
stead of such subsection the following:
While in any park, no person shall practise, carry on, conduct
"(2)
or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession,
unless expressly authorized by permit;
(3) No person shall, in any park, place, maintain or allow to remain any coin
operated vending machine or game of any nature except when expressly
authorized by permit."
19. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 45
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"45. While in a park, no person shall beg, panhandle, solicit or invite
subscriptions or contributions, unless expressly authorized by permit."
20. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 48
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"48 The authority to issue permits referred to in the by-law is delegated
(1 )
to the Director."
The Director may issue a permit on such terms and conditions as
(2)
the Director considers in the best interests of the City taking into
account the general use of the park, the proposed use, the degree
of interference or incompatibility that the proposed use may have
with other uses or other users of the park, matters of health and
safety, the effect the proposed use may have on flora and
fauna and such other circumstances that the Director may consider
appropriate.
The Director may impose such terms and conditions on the
(3)
issuance of a permit as the Director considers appropriate in the
circumstances including but not limited to: restrictions as to
uses; time and location restrictions; indemnification, insurance and
security for injury to persons or damage to property; protective
measures for flora and fauna; and payment of permit and other
costs associated with the permit and use.
The Director may refuse to issue a permit or revoke immediately a
(4)
permit issued: where the applicant or permit holder has breached or
failed to comply with any term or condition of the permit or issuance
thereof; for non-payment of any fee or cost required to be paid by
the applicant or permit holder; the breach or failure to comply
with any City policy or by-law; the breach of any federal
or provincial law; where the use by the permit holder is causing or
has caused a disturbance; where the proposed use or current use
unreasonably interferes with the use of the park by the public; and
where it otherwise is in the best interests of the City that the
application for a permit be denied or permit revoked.
(5) A permit authorized under this By-Law is non-transferable.
(6) The issuance of a permit pursuant to this by-law shall not relieve
any person from the necessity of acquiring any other licence or
permit required for such activity by any governmental or public
authority.
(7) All permits issued for activities contemplated in this by-law remain
the property of the City."
21. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing subsection
(2)(b) of Section 52 thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such
subsection the following:
employees, agents or contractors of the City while engaged in works or
"(b)
services undertaken for or on behalf of the City; or"
22. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Section 56
thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Section the following:
"56. The schedules attached to this by-law and listed below shall have
the same force and effect as if the provisions contained therein were
contained in the body of this by-law:
Schedule "A" - Release of Balloons
Schedule liB" - Filming
Schedule "C" - Mooring"
23. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Schedule
B thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Schedule the following:
"Schedule "B":
All commercial or private film and television production activity in the City
of Hamilton, prior to the commencement of same, must be reported to
and coordinated through the Hamilton Film Liaison Office, Economic
Development. All film and television activities are subject to the
guidelines and regulations listed in the "Policy for Filming on Streets and
Properties under the Jurisdiction of the City of Hamilton"."
24. By-law 01-219, as amended, is hereby further amended by repealing Schedule
C thereof and substituting in the place and stead of such Schedule the following:
"SCHEDULE "C":
Unless expressly authorized by permit no operator or owner of a boat or other
watercraft shall moor, allow to be moored, or operate such a boat or watercraft
within Bayfront Park or Pier 4 Park or along the Sea Walls located within Bayfront
Park or Pier 4 Park or within the waters of any marina owned or operated by the
City of Hamilton."
25. In all other respects, By-law No. 01-219, as amended, is hereby confirmed in full
force and effect.
26. This By-law shall come into force and effect on the day of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED and ENACTED this 27th day of April, 2004.



Content from 05115 to amend the site alteration bylaw no 03126pdf:
Authority: Item 9, Planning and Economic
Development Committee
Report; 05-010 (PD05097)
CM: May 11,2005
Bill No. 115
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-11 5
To Amend the Site Alteration By-law No. 03-126
WHEREAS Council deems it necessary to amend By-law No. 03-126 dealing with site
alteration, filling and removal of topsoil, to make housekeeping and other changes;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Clause (u) of Section 2 of By-law No. 03-126 is repealed and replaced with the
following:
“(u) “watercourse” means an identifiable depression in the ground in which a
natural flow of water regularly or continuously occurs”.”
2. Clause (e) of section 3.3 of By-law No. 03-126 is repealed and replaced with
the following:
“(e) all fill placed or dumped includes only soil, stone, sod or other material
acceptable to the Director and that such material is clean and free of
any glass, plastics, rubber, metals, termites, liquid other than water,
asphalt, garbage or contaminates.”
3. Section 4.3 of By-law No. 03-126 is repealed and replaced with the following:
“4.3 The Director shall so far as practical cause notice of the application and
of the date the application will be considered to be mailed to adjacent
property owners within 150 meters of the subject property where the
subject property is in either the Urban Areas or Rural Settlement Areas
both of which areas are as identified in the Regional Official Plan of the
former Regional-Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth as amended from
time to time, and in the case where the subject property is not found in
either of those two areas, then notices shall be mailed to the adjacent
property owners within 600 meters of the subject property.”
4. Clause (c) of section 9.1 of By-law No. 03-126 is repealed and replaced with
the following:
“(c) That any fill proposed to be placed or dumped includes only soil, stone,
sod or other material acceptable to the Director and that such material
is clean and free of any glass, plastics, rubber, metals, termites, liquid
other than water, asphalt, garbage or contaminates.”
5. Section 13 of By-law No. 03-12 6 is repealed and replaced with the following:
“13. An expired permit may be renewed for a period of not longer than one
year, within a six month period from the expiry date, upon the original
applicant making a written request to the Director accompanied by the
payment of one-half of the original permit fee.”
6. Clause (b) of section 15 of By-law No. 03-12 6 is repealed and replaced with the
following:
“(b) all fill placed or dumped includes only soil, stone, sod or other material
acceptable to the Director and such material is clean and free of any
glass, plastics, rubber, metals, termites, liquid other than water, asphalt,
gar bage or co nt a mi na te s .
”
7. Clause (j) of section 16 of By-law No. 03-126 is repealed and replaced with the
following:
“(j) ensure that all fill placed or dumped includes only soil, stone, sod or
other material acceptable to the Director and that such material is clean
and free of any glass, plastics, rubber, metals, termites, liquid other than
water, asphalt, garbage or contaminates.’]
8. That the introductory words of section 20 of By-law No. 03-126, being all words
prior to clause (a) of that section, are repealed and replaced with the following:
“20. Upon application for an issuance of a permit, the property owner shall
permit entry and inspection of the site at all reasonable times, to take fill
samples for the purpose of determining whether material used for fill
includes only soil, stone, sod or other material acceptable to the Director
and such material is clean and free of any glass, plastics, rubber, metals,
termites, liquid other than water, asphalt, garbage or contaminates. For
the purposes of an inspection under this section the Director may:”
9. Section 21 of By-law No. 03-126 is repealed and replaced with the following:
“21. Costs incurred by the City under section 19 of this By-law together with
interest accrued may be registered against the land, collected by action
or in like manner as taxes as is provided for the Municipal Act, S. 0.
2001, chapter 25 as amended.”
10. Schedule “Ao f By-law No. 03-126, respecting fees, is repealed and replaced
with the following:
“Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-12 6
Fees and Requirements for- Site Alteration Permits
1.1 Subject to clause 1.2 of this Schedule below, the processing,
administration and inspection fees applicable to an application for a site
alteration permit, due upon application, are $200.00 for a property of less
than two hectares in area and not used for commercial or industrial
purposes; and $500.00 for a property of two hectares or more in area
plus $25.00 per hectare of the area where the site is proposed to be
altered.
1.2 Pursuant to section 13 of the By-law, the fee for an extension request
made within six months of the expiry of a permit shall be one-half of the
original permit fee, and if made beyond six months shall be calculated
under clause 1. Io f this Schedule above.
1.3 Where an agreement is required by the Director pursuant to Section 8 of
this By-law and is required to be registered on title, it is the responsibility
of the owner to register the agreement on title prior to the issuance of the
permit, and the owner or applicant shall be responsible for all costs of
such registration or discharge of the agreement from the title.”
11. Clause 2(a) of Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-126 is hereby amended by
replacing the word “sit” with the word “site”.
12. In all other respects By-law No. 03-126 is confirmed without change.
13. This by-law comes into force and effect upon enactment.
PASSED and th day of May, 2005.



Content from 05128 to amend fireworks bylaw no 02285pdf:
Authority: Item 2, Community Services
Committee, Report 05-003
CM: April 13, 2005
Bill No. 128
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-128
To Amend Fireworks Bylaw No. 02-285 to Temporarily Provide an Extended
Sale Period
WHEREAS Council desires to amend By-law No. 02-285 respecting fireworks to
provide on a trial basis a ten day sale period prior to holidays in place of the current
seven day period, and which trial period will expire on July 2, 2005;
AND WHEREAS Section 121 of the Municipal Act, S. 0. 2001, Chapter 25 provides
that a municipality may regulate or prohibit the sale of fireworks;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 5.3 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 02-285 is hereby amended to
replace the word “seven” with the word “fourteen”.
2. This by-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment, and is further repealed on July 2, 2005.
PASSED and ENACTED this 16thd ay of May, 2005.



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw introductionpdf:
BY-LAW NUMBER 05-200
FOR THE
CITY OF HAMILTON
Unless otherwise noted, Sections 1 to 6 inclusive, and those Schedules A, B, C
D, E and F which incorporate boundaries for Downtown Hamilton were passed
by the Council of the City of Hamilton and became effective on May 25, 2005.
Section 7 which incorporates new Open Space and Parks Zones for the Urban
Area of the City of Hamilton was passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton
(By-law No. 06-166) and became effective on June 14, 2006. New
Conservation/Hazard Land Zones for the Rural Area were passed by the Council
of the City of Hamilton (By-law No. 15-173) and became effective on July 10,
2015.
Section 8 which incorporates new Institutional Zones for the Urban Area of the
City of Hamilton was passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton (By-law No.
07-101) and became effective on March 28, 2007.
Section 9 which incorporates new Industrial Zones for the Urban Area of the City
of Hamilton was passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton (By-law No. 10-
128) and became effective on June 28, 2011. New Industrial Zones for the
Airport Employment Growth District were passed by the Council of the City of
Hamilton (By-law No. 10-288) and became effective on April 10, 2015. A new
Extractive Industrial Zone was passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton (By-
law No. 15-173) and became effective on July 10, 2015.
Section 12 which incorporates new Rural Zones for the Rural Area of the City of
Hamilton was passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton (By-law No. 15-173)
and became effective on July 10, 2015.
Section 11 which incorporates new Transit Oriented Corridor Zones for the Urban
Area of the City of Hamilton, where Phase 1 was passed by the Council of the
City of Hamilton (By-law No. 16-265) and became effective on October 12, 2016,
and Phase 2 was passed by Council of the City of Hamilton (By-law No. 18-032)
and became effective on February 14, 2018.
Section 14 which incorporates new Waterfront Zones for the Urban Area of the
City of Hamilton was passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton (By-law No.
17-095) and became effective on May 24, 2017.
Section 10 which incorporates new Commercial and Mixed Use Zones for the
Urban Area of the City of Hamilton was passed by the Council of the City of
Hamilton (By-law No. 17-240) and became effective on November 8, 2017.
Comprehensive amendments to Section 6: Downtown Zones were passed by the
Council of the City of Hamilton (By-law 18-114)
(Updated August 2019)
Grey Shaded – Zones are in effect, but certain regulations and special
exceptions are still appealed to the Ontario Land Tribunal. Refer to the relevant
Sections and Schedules in the Zoning By-law.



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 1 administrationpdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW No. 05-200
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which
apply to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of this By-law;
AND WHEREAS it is desired to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively deal
with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By-law will be enacted and
come into force and effect in several stages;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is the first stage and is applicable to the Downtown area
of the City, as hereinafter described and depicted;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is in conformity with the Official Plan of the Hamilton
Planning Area, approved by the Minister under the Planning Act on June 1, 1982 as
amended by Official Plan Amendment No. 200 as adopted by the City of Hamilton by
By-law No. 05-153.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton hereby enacts as follows:
1.1 TITLE OF BY-LAW
By-law No. 05-200 shall be cited as the Zoning By-law of the City of Hamilton,
and herein may be referenced as “this By-law”.
1.2 EFFECTIVE DATE
This By-law No. 05-200 shall be deemed to have come into effect on the date of
the passing thereof by the Council of the City of Hamilton, subject to Final
Approval of Official Plan Amendment No. 200.
August 14, 2019 1-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
1.3 AREA TO WHICH BY-LAW APPLIES
The provisions of this By-law shall apply throughout the City to the extent of all
lands contained within the limits of the zone boundaries, as shown on the
Zoning Maps forming Schedule “A” of this By-law.
1.4 SCOPE OF BY-LAW
Within the area to which this By-law applies, no person shall erect, alter, enlarge
or use, or permit to be erected, altered, enlarged or used, any building or
structure in whole or in part, nor use any land in whole or in part, except in
accordance with the provisions of this By-law.
(By-law 10-076, April 14, 2010)
1.5 VALIDITY
Should any section, cause or provision of this By-law including any notation on
the Zoning Maps, be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid,
the same shall not affect the validity of this By-law as a whole or any part
thereof, other than the part so declared to be invalid.
1.6 COMPLIANCE WITH APPLICABLE LAW
Nothing in this By-law shall relieve any person from the obligation to comply with
any applicable Federal or Provincial statute, regulation or By-law of the City in
force from time to time, or the obligation to obtain any license, permit, authority
or approval required under any By-law of the City.
1.7 REPEAL OF EXISTING BY-LAWS
All the provisions of By-law No. 6593 of the former City of Hamilton, and all of
the provisions of By-law No. 87-57 of the former Town of Ancaster, and all of the
provisions of By-law No. 3581-86 of the former Town of Dundas, and all of the
provisions of By-law No. 90-145-Z of the former Town of Flamborough, and all of
the provisions of By-law No. 3692-92 of the former City of Stoney Creek, and all
of the provisions of By-law No. 464 of the former Township of Glanbrook, and all
subsequent amendments to any of said By-laws referenced hereto, insofar as
they affect those lands within the limits of the zone boundaries so indicated in
Schedule “A” of this By-law, shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
August 14, 2019 1-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
1.8 ADMINISTRATION
This By-law shall be administered by the City’s General Manager of Planning
and Economic Development.
1.9 ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
a) This By-law shall be enforced by persons appointed by By-law of the City;
b) Every person who uses any land or erects or uses any building in any
manner contrary to any requirement of this By-law, or who permits such
use or erection, or who violates any provision of this By-law or permits a
violation, is guilty of an offence and on conviction pursuant to the
Provincial Offences Act is liable;
i) On a first conviction to a fine of not more than $25,000.00; and,
ii) On a subsequent conviction to a fine of not more than $10,000.00
for each day or part thereof upon which the contravention has
continued after the day on which the person was first convicted;
and,
(By-law 10-076, April 14, 2010)
c) Where a corporation is convicted under Section 1, Subsection 1.9 (b) of
this By-law, the maximum penalty that may be imposed shall be:
i) On a first conviction a fine of not more than $50,000.00; and,
ii) On a subsequent conviction a fine of not more than $25,000.00 for
each day or part thereof upon which the contravention has
continued after the day on which the corporation was first
convicted and not as provided for in Section 1, Subsection 1.9 (b)
of this By-law.
1.10 REMEDIES
The contravention of any requirement of this By-law may be restrained by action
of any ratepayer of the City pursuant to the provisions of the Municipal Act.
August 14, 2019 1-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
1.11 LEGAL NON-CONFORMING USES
No person shall use or permit the use of any land, building or structure or part
thereof, or erect, repair, or alter or permit the erection, repairing or altering of
any building or structure which is not in conformity with the provisions of this By-
law, EXCEPT as follows:
a) The erection or use for a purpose prohibited by the By-law of any building
for which a permit is required by and issued under the Building Code Act,
prior to the effective date of this By-law, so long as the building when
erected is used and continues to be used for the purpose for which it was
erected and provided the permit has not been revoked under the Building
Code Act;
b) Where a building permit has been lawfully issued for the construction of a
building prior to the effective date of this By-law and where the yard
requirements for said building are found to be in contravention by no
more than 0.03 m, the non-conforming yard shall be deemed to conform
with the requirements of this By-law;
c) The repair or restoration of any existing building, or part thereof, to a safe
condition provided that such repair or restoration will not increase the
height, area or volume, or site coverage of such building and that the
building continues to be used for the same purpose and in the same
manner as it was used on the effective date of this By-law;
(By-law 10-076, April 14, 2010)
i) In addition to Section 1.11 c), the repair, restoration, or
replacement of an existing porch, deck, balcony, unenclosed fire
escape, or open stair of an existing Single Detached, Semi-
Detached, or Duplex Dwelling shall be permitted, provided that
such repair, restoration, or replacement will not increase the
height, area or volume, or site coverage of such structure.
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
d) Swimming pools, hot tubs, and accessory buildings, including but not
limited to sheds, garages and gazebos on a lot containing a single
detached dwelling or duplex dwelling which is prohibited by the applicable
zoning by-law, but which was lawfully used as a single detached or
duplex dwelling on the date of the passing of this By-law shall be
permitted as follows:
i) the location and height complies with the applicable provisions of
this By-law; and,
August 14, 2019 1-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) this exemption shall not apply to the Open Space and Parks
Classification Zones; or,
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
e) In accordance with Subsection 34(10) of the Planning Act, R.S.O., 1990
c.P. 13, as amended, the addition of any porch, deck, balcony, unclosed
fire escape or open stair to a single detached or duplex dwelling which is
prohibited by this By-law, but which was lawfully used as single detached
or duplex dwelling on the date of the passing of the By-law, shall
permitted as follows:
i) the location complies with applicable provisions of this By-law; and,
ii) this exception shall not apply to the Open Space and Parks
Classification Zones.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
1.12 TRANSITION PROVISIONS
Complete Applications for a Building Permit
1.12.1 Nothing in this By-law prevents the development or use of a lot or a
building for which a complete application for a building permit was
received by the City, if the development or use complies, or the
building permit application is amended to comply, with the provisions
of the applicable former zoning by-law as it read immediately prior to
the passing of the passing of the following By-laws:
1. Commercial and Mixed Use Zoning By-law 17-240, November 8,
2017
2. Downtown Zoning By-law 18-114, May 9, 2018
3. Residential Zones
a. Low Density Residential By-law 22-197, August 12, 2022
b. Low Density Residential By-law 24-051, April 10, 2024
Other Types of Complete Applications
1.12.2 Where a complete application was received by the City on or before
the date of passing of this By-law for the development or use of a lot
or one or more buildings, approval may be granted in the context of
the applicable former zoning by-law as it read immediately prior to
August 14, 2019 1-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
the passing of this By-law, for one or more of the following
applications where they are consistent with the intent of the complete
application:
1. Any application under Section 45 of the Planning Act;
2. Site plan control approval pursuant to Section 41 of the Planning
Act;
3. Consent pursuant to Section 53 of the Planning Act;
4. Draft plan of subdivision pursuant to Section 51 of the Planning
Act or a description under the Condominium Act, 1998, S.O.
1998, c.19;
5. Payment in lieu of parking agreement pursuant to Section 40 of
the Planning Act; and
6. A part lot control exemption pursuant to Section 50 of the
Planning Act.
1.12.3 Where the development or use of a lot or one or more buildings
qualifies under Clause 1.12.2, a building permit may be issued after
final approval is received for all required applications if the
development or use complies, or the building permit application for
the development or use is amended to comply, with the provisions of
the applicable former Zoning By-law as it read immediately prior to
the passing of this By-law, and any amendments thereto.
1.12.4 Nothing in this By-law applies so as to continue the exemption
provided by Clauses 1.12.1 and 1.12.2 beyond the issuance of the
final building permit upon which the exemptions are founded.
1.12.5 Clauses 1.12.1, 1.12.2, 1.12.3 and 1.12.4 are repealed in their
entirety 10 years after the date of passing of the By-laws listed in
Section 1.12.1.
1.12.6 Minor Variances
Continuation of Approved Variances
1.12.6.1 During the 10 year period commencing on the date of passing of this
By-law or date associated with amendments to the By-law provided
in Section 1.12.1 above, and expiring on the date specified in Clause
1.12.5, a building permit may be issued in the context of the
applicable former zoning by-law as it read immediately prior to the
passing of this By-law for any development subject to one or more
approved minor variances under the provisions of the applicable
former zoning by-law.
August 14, 2019 1-6
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 1: ADMINISTRATION
ZONING BY-LAW
1.12.6.2 After the 10 year period in Clause 1.12.5 expires, minor variances
approved under the provisions of the applicable former zoning by-law
may be relied upon only if the zoning provision respecting the minor
variance is the same or more permissive in this By-law than in the
applicable former Zoning By-law.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
PASSED and ENACTED this day of , 2005.
MAYOR CLERK
August 14, 2019 1-7



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 121  agriculture a1 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
12.1 AGRICULTURE (A1) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Agriculture (A1) Zone for any purpose other than one
or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or use
shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
12.1.1 PERMITTED USES Agriculture
Community Garden (By-law No. 21-189,
October 13, 2021)
Residential Care Facility
Secondary Uses to Agriculture
Single Detached Dwelling
Veterinary Service – Farm Animal
12.1.2 PROHIBITED USES The following uses are prohibited:
a) For lands located within Vulnerable
Area 1 as delineated in Figures 5.0,
5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of Schedule “F”-
Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the following activities:
1) storage, treatment and
discharge of mine
tailings;
2) land farming of petroleum
refining waste;
3) storage of polychlorinated
biphenyl (PCB) waste;
4) application of untreated
septage to land;
5) injection of liquid waste
into a well;
6) storage of hazardous
waste.
ii) hazardous waste
management facility;
iii) waste management facility;
12.1-1
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
iv) Salt Storage Facility that can
accommodate 5,000 tonnes
and greater;
v) snow storage facility greater
than 1 ha in size;
vi) Motor Vehicle Service
Station;
vii) motor vehicle collision repair
establishment.
b) For lands located within Vulnerable
Area 2, as delinated in Figures 5.0,
5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of Schedule “F”-
Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the injection of liquid waste
into a well;
ii) waste disposal facility.
c) For lands located within Vulnerable
Area 3 as delineated on Figure 5.0
of Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the application of untreated
septage to land.
d) Notwithstanding Section 12.1.1 and
the definition of Agriculture, for
lands located within Lower Stoney
Creek as delineated on Figure 6.0
of Schedule “F” – Special Figures:
i) Cannabis Growing and
Harvesting Facility;
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.1-2
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) aquaponics facility.
12.1.3 REGULATIONS
12.1.3.1 AGRICULTURE AND
VETERINARY SERVICE
– FARM ANIMAL
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area i) 40.4 hectares;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, for the
lots delineated on Figure “7.0” -
Specialty Crop of Schedule “F” –
Special Figures, the minimum Lot
Area shall be 16.2 hectares.
b) Minimum Front Yard 15.0 metres
c) Minimum Side Yard 15.0 metres
d) Minimum Rear Yard 15.0 metres
e) Maximum Lot Coverage i) 20%;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, the
maximum lot coverage for
greenhouse operations shall be
70%.
f) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any
minimum Front Yard or minimum
Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 10
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law;
iii) Sections i) and ii) above do not
apply to the storage or parking of
Agricultural vehicles or equipment.
g) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
12.1-3
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Small Scale Retailing of i) The total maximum gross floor area
Agricultural Products of all buildings and structures
devoted to retailing of agricultural
products grown primarily as part of
the farm operation, exclusive of a
Farm Produce/Product Stand, shall
be 200.0 square metres;
ii) Shall not be permitted within a
Dwelling or a Farm Labour
Residence;
iii) In addition to Section 12.1.3.1 i) i),
the total maximum gross floor area
of a Farm Produce/Product Stand
shall be 18.5 square metres;
iv) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
b), c) and d) and Section 4.8.2 a), a
Farm Produce/Product Stand shall
be permitted in any yard.
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
j) Farm Labour Residence A Farm Labour Residence,
accessory to Agriculture, may be
permitted in accordance with the
following:
1. Shall have a maximum
building height of 10.5 metres.
2. All Farm Labour Residences
shall have an aggregate
maximum lot coverage of 420
square metres.
3. Individual Farm Labour
Residence units shall have a
maximum gross floor area of
200 square metres.
4. All Farm Labour Residences
12.1-4
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
shall be separated from the
principal Farm Dwelling by a
minimum of 30 metres.
5. All Farm Labour Residences
shall be a separated by a
minimum of 10 metres.
6. In addition to Section 5 of this
By-law, a minimum of 1
parking space per Farm
Labour Residence shall be
required in the absence of a
principal farm dwelling on the
same lot.
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27, 2024, not final &
binding)
k) Mushroom Operations i) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
b), c), and d) above, any buildings
or structures used for a Mushroom
Operation shall be set back a
minimum of 30.0 metres from any
lot line;
ii) No stockpiles of waste, manure,
fertilizers or compost shall be
permitted within 30.0 metres of any
lot line.
l) Nursery i) Retailing of horticultural products and
bulk material shall be in accordance
with Section 12.1.3.1 i);
ii) The outdoor storage of unenclosed
piles of bulk product for retail
purposes shall not exceed an
aggregate area of 100.0 square
metres.
m) Cannabis Growing and i) The maximum gross floor area for
Harvesting Facility all new buildings and structures
devoted to a Cannabis Growing and
Harvesting Facility shall not exceed
2,000.0 square metres;
12.1-5
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) Notwithstanding Section 12.1.3.1
m) i) above, existing buildings may
be used for a Cannabis Growing
and Harvesting Facility;
iii) The testing, packaging, and
shipping shall be accessory to the
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting
Facility;
iv) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 d),
any building, structure used for a
cannabis growing and harvesting
facility shall be setback a minimum
of 150 metres from:
1. Any portion of a lot line
abutting Residential,
Institutional, Commercial and
Mixed Use Zones, Settlement
Residential (S1), Settlement
Commercial (S2), or
Settlement Institutional (S3)
Zone; or,
2. Any residential dwelling unit
existing on the date of passing
of the by-law, any building
used for farm labour
residence, mobile home,
educational establishment,
residential care facility, place
of worship, day care or park;
v) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
b), c) and d) above, all buildings or
structures associated with the use
shall be set back a minimum of 30.0
metres from any lot line;
vi) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1 f)
i), ii) and iii) above, outdoor storage
shall not be permitted;
12.1-6
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
vii) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1 i)
i), ii), iii) and iv) above, retail sales
shall not be permitted.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
12.1.3.2 SECONDARY USES TO In addition to Section 12.1.3.1 above, the
AGRICULTURE – following additional regulations shall
ADDITIONAL apply to Secondary Uses to Agriculture:
REGULATIONS
a) Uses Permitted as Agricultural Processing Establishment –
Secondary to Agriculture Secondary
Agricultural Research Operation
Agritourism
Home Industry
Kennel
Agricultural Alcohol Production Facility
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
Landscape Contracting Establishment
Secondary
b) Minimum Lot Area Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
a) and 4.12 d), Secondary Uses to
Agriculture shall only be permitted
on a lot with a minimum lot area of
5.0 hectares.
c) Limitation on Uses Notwithstanding Section 12.1.3.2
a), only one Home Industry or one
Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall be
permitted per lot.
d) Agricultural Processing i) The total maximum gross floor area
Establishment - for all buildings and structures
Secondary devoted to an Agricultural
Processing Establishment -
Secondary shall not exceed 500.0
square metres;
Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
ii)
b), c) and d), all buildings or
structures associated with an
Agricultural Processing
Establishment - Secondary shall be
set back a minimum of 30.0 metres
from any lot line;
12.1-7
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
iii) Outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 12.1.3.1 f),
and shall not exceed an aggregate
area of 100.0 square metres.
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
e) Agritourism The total maximum gross floor area of all
buildings or structures devoted to the
Agritourism use shall not exceed 500.0
square metres.
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
f) Home Industry i) All buildings or structures used as
part of the Home Industry shall be
set back a minimum of 15.0 metres
from any lot line, and shall occupy
no more than 250.0 square metres
of gross floor area;
ii) Shall be operated by a resident of
the property, with no more than 3
non-resident employees;
iii) Outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 12.1.3.1 f),
and shall not exceed an aggregate
area of 100.0 square metres;
iv) In addition to Section 5.3 b) a
maximum of three Motor Vehicles
associated with the Home Industry
may be parked unenclosed.
Additional Motor Vehicles
associated with the use, including
all Motor Vehicles – Commercial,
must be parked in an enclosed
building. This regulation does not
apply to the storage or parking of
Agricultural vehicles and
equipment.
12.1-8
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
g) Kennel i) The total maximum gross floor area
for all buildings and structures
devoted to a Kennel use shall be
500.0 square metres;
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
ii) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
b), c) and d), all buildings or
structures associated with a Kennel
shall be set back a minimum of 60.0
metres from any lot line;
iii) No domestic animals shall be
permitted to be kept in any open
area within 60.0 metres of any lot
line.
h) Agricultural Alcohol i) Notwithstanding Sections 12.1.3.1
Production Facility a), 12.1.3.2 b), and 4.12 d), an
Agricultural Alcohol Production
Facility shall only be permitted on a
lot with a minimum area of 4.0
hectares, of which a minimum of 2.0
hectares shall be used for the
growing of grapes, fruits, hops or
other produce directly associated
with on-site beer, cider, wine or
spirit production;
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
ii) The total maximum building area
devoted to an Agricultural Alcohol
Production Facility use shall be
500.0 square metres of gross floor
area exclusive of the basement or
cellar, of which a maximum of 25%
of the gross floor area may be used
for Retail and/or hospitality/tasting
purposes.
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
12.1-9
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
i) Landscape Contracting i) Notwithstanding Section 12.1.3.2
Establishment – a), a Landscape Contracting
Secondary Establishment – Secondary shall
only be permitted as a use
Secondary to a Nursery;
ii) In addition to Section 12.1.3.2 b):
1. On lots with a lot area of 7.0
hectares or greater, a
minimum of 65 percent of the
lot area zoned Agriculture
(A1), Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) shall be used for
the growing of plants,
shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation as part of the
Nursery operation, and may
include the growing of other
Agricultural products. In no
case shall the portion of the
lot zoned Agriculture (A1),
Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) which is used for
the growing of plants,
shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation as part of the
Nursery operation be less
than 3.0 hectares in area.
2. On lots with a lot area less
than 7.0 hectares, a
minimum of 50 percent of the
lot area zoned Agriculture
(A1), Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) shall be used for
the growing of plants,
shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation as part of the
Nursery operation. In no
case shall the portion of the
lot zoned Agriculture (A1),
12.1-10
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) which is used for
the growing of plants,
shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation as part of the
Nursery operation be less
than 3.0 hectares in area.
iii) All buildings or structures used as
part of the Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall be
set back a minimum of 15.0 metres
from any lot line, and the total
gross floor area of all buildings or
structures used as part of the
Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall
not exceed a total maximum gross
floor area of 250.0 square metres;
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
iv) Notwithstanding Section 12.1.3.1 f),
outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall not exceed an
aggregate area of 100.0 square
metres, and shall be set back a
minimum of 30.0 metres from any
lot line and screened by a visual
barrier in accordance with Section
4.19 of this By-law;
v) In addition to Section 5.3 b) a
maximum of three Motor Vehicles
associated with the Landscape
Contracting Establishment -
Secondary may be parked
unenclosed. Additional Motor
Vehicles associated with the use,
including all Motor Vehicles –
Commercial, must be parked in an
enclosed building. This regulation
does not apply to the storage or
parking of Agricultural vehicles or
equipment or parking of employee
Motor Vehicles.
12.1-11
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
vi) Notwithstanding v) above all
unenclosed parking areas
associated with the Landscape
Contracting Establishment –
Secondary use shall be screened
by a visual barrier in accordance
with Section 4.19 of this by-law.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015, As amended
by OMB Decision PL151130 dated March 13,
2017)
12.1.3.3 SINGLE DETACHED
DWELLING AND
RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITY
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0.4 hectares
b) Minimum Lot Width 30.0 metres
c) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
d) Minimum Front Yard 10.0 metres
e) Minimum Side Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 10.0 metres
g) Maximum Capacity for Shall not exceed 10 residents.
Residential Care Facility
h) Home Business In accordance with the requirements of
Regulations Section 4.21 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
j) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
12.1.3.4 ADDITIONAL In accordance with the requirements of
DWELLING Section 4.33. of this By-law.
UNIT AND ADDITIONAL (By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
DWELLING UNIT -
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27, 2024, not final and
binding)
12.1-12
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
DETACHED
REGULATIONS
12.1.3.5 COMMUNITY GARDEN In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.27 of this By-law
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
(By-law 19-062, March 27, 2019)
12.1-13
May 12, 2021



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 122  rural a2 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
12.2 RURAL (A2) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Rural (A2) Zone for any purpose other than one or more
of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or use shall also
comply with the prescribed regulations:
12.2.1 PERMITTED USES Abattoir
Agriculture
Agricultural Processing Establishment -
Stand Alone
Agricultural Storage Establishment
Community Garden (By-law No. 21-189,
October 13, 2021)
Farm Product Supply Dealer
Kennel
Livestock Assembly Point
Residential Care Facility
Secondary Uses to Agriculture
Single Detached Dwelling
Veterinary Service – Farm Animal
12.2.2 PROHIBITED USES The following uses are prohibited:
a) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 1 as delineated in
Figures 5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of
Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the following activities:
1) storage, treatment and
discharge of mine
tailings;
2) land farming of
petroleum refining
waste;
3) storage of
polychlorinated biphenyl
(PCB) waste;
4) application of untreated
septage to land;
12.2-1
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
5) injection of liquid waste
into a well;
6) storage of hazardous
waste;
ii) hazardous waste
management facility;
iii) waste management facility;
iv) Salt Storage Facility that can
accommodate 5,000 tonnes
and greater;
v) snow storage facility greater
than 1 ha in size;
vi) Motor Vehicle Service
Station;
vii) motor vehicle collision repair
establishment.
b) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 2, as delineated
in Figures 5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of
Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the injection of liquid waste
into a well;
ii) waste disposal facility.
c) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 3 as delineated
on Figure 5.0 of Schedule “F”-
Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the application of untreated
septage to land.
12.2-2
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
12.2.3 REGULATIONS
12.2.3.1 AGRICULTURE AND
VETERINARY SERVICE
– FARM ANIMAL
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 40.4 hectares
b) Minimum Front Yard 15.0 metres
c) Minimum Side Yard 15.0 metres
d) Minimum Rear Yard 15.0 metres
e) Maximum Lot Coverage i) 20%;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, the
maximum lot coverage for
greenhouse operations shall be
70%.
f) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any
minimum Front Yard or minimum
Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 10.0
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law;
iii) Sections i) and ii) above do not
apply to the storage or parking of
Agricultural vehicles or equipment.
g) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements
of Sections 4.8 and 4.8.2 of this By-
law.
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Small Scale Retailing of i) The total maximum gross floor area
12.2-3
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Agricultural Products of all buildings and structures
devoted to retailing of agricultural
products grown primarily as part of
the farm operation, exclusive of a
Farm Produce/Product Stand, shall
be 200.0 square metres;
ii) Shall not be permitted within a
Dwelling or a Farm Labour
Residence;
iii) In addition to Section 12.2.3.1 i) i),
the total maximum gross floor area
of a Farm Produce/Product Stand
shall be 18.5 square metres;
iv) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1
b), c) and d) and Section 4.8.2 a), a
Farm Produce/Product Stand shall
be permitted in any yard.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
j) Farm Labour Residence A Farm Labour Residence,
accessory to Agriculture, may be
permitted in accordance with the
following:
1. Shall have a maximum
building height of 10.5 metres.
2. All Farm Labour Residences
shall have an aggregate
maximum lot coverage of 420
square metres.
3. Individual Farm Labour
Residence units shall have a
maximum gross floor area of
200 square metres.
4. All Farm Labour Residences
shall be separated from the
principal Farm Dwelling by a
minimum of 30 metres.
5. All Farm Labour Residences
shall be a separated by a
12.2-4
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
minimum of 10 metres.
6. In addition to Section 5 of this
By-law, a minimum of 1
parking space per Farm
Labour Residence shall be
required in the absence of a
principal farm dwelling on the
same lot.
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27, 2024, not final
& binding)
k) Mushroom Operations i) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1
b), c), and d) above, any buildings or
structures used for a Mushroom
Operation shall be set back a
minimum of 30.0 metres from any lot
line;
ii) No stockpiles of waste, manure,
fertilizers or compost shall be
permitted within 30.0 metres of any
lot line.
l) Nursery i) Retailing of horticultural products
and bulk material shall be in
accordance with Section 12.2.3.1 i);
ii) The outdoor storage of unenclosed
piles of bulk product for retail
purposes shall not exceed an
aggregate area of 100.0 square
metres.
m) Cannabis Growing and i) The maximum gross floor area for all
Harvesting Facility new buildings and structures
devoted to a Cannabis Growing and
Harvesting Facility shall not exceed
12.2-5
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
2,000.0 square metres;
ii) Notwithstanding Section 12.2.3.1 m)
i) above, existing buildings may be
used for a Cannabis Growing and
Harvesting Facility;
iii) The testing, packaging, and shipping
shall be accessory to the Cannabis
Growing and Harvesting Facility;
iv) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 d), any
building, structure used for a
cannabis growing and harvesting
facility shall be setback a minimum
of 150 metres from:
1. Any portion of a lot line
abutting Residential,
Institutional, Commercial and
Mixed Use Zones, Settlement
Residential (S1), Settlement
Commercial (S2), or
Settlement Institutional (S3)
Zone; or,
2. Any residential dwelling unit
existing at the date of the
passing of the by-law, any
building used for farm labour
residence, mobile home,
educational establishment,
residential care facility, place of
worship, day care or park;
v) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1
b), c) and d) above, all buildings or
structures associated with the use
shall be set back a minimum of 30.0
metres from any lot line;
vi) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1 f)
i), ii) and iii) above, outdoor storage
shall not be permitted;
vii) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1 i)
12.2-6
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
i), ii), iii) and iv) above, retail sales
shall not be permitted.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
12.2.3.2 SECONDARY USES TO In addition to Section 12.2.3.1 above, the
AGRICULTURE – following additional regulations shall apply
ADDITIONAL to Secondary Uses to Agriculture:
REGULATIONS
a) Uses Permitted as Agricultural Processing Establishment –
Secondary to Agriculture Secondary
Agricultural Research Operation
Agritourism
Home Industry
Agricultural Alcohol Production Facility
(By-law 22-084, April 13, 2022)
Landscape Contracting Establishment –
Secondary
b) Minimum Lot Area
Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1 a) and
4.12 d), Secondary Uses to Agriculture
shall have a minimum lot area of 5.0
hectares.
c) Limitation on Uses
Notwithstanding Section 12.2.3.2 a), only
one Home Industry or one Landscape
Contracting Establishment – Secondary
shall be permitted per lot.
d) Agricultural Processing i) The total maximum gross floor area
Establishment - for all buildings and structures
Secondary devoted to an Agricultural
Processing Establishment –
Secondary is 500.0 square metres;
ii) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1
b), c), and d), all buildings or
structures associated with an
Agricultural Processing
Establishment – Secondary shall be
set back a minimum of 30.0 metres
from any lot line;
iii) Outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 12.2.3.1 f),
12.2-7
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
and shall not exceed an aggregate
area of 100.0 square metres.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
e) Agritourism The total maximum gross floor area of all
buildings or structures devoted to the
Agritourism use shall not exceed 500.0
square metres.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
f) Home Industry i) All buildings or structures used as
part of the Home Industry shall be
set back a minimum of 15.0 metres
from any lot line, and shall occupy
no more than 250.0 square metres
of gross floor area;
ii) Shall be operated by a resident of
the property, with no more than 3
non-resident employees;
iii) Outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 12.2.3.1 f),
and shall not exceed an aggregate
area of 100.0 square metres;
iv) In addition to Section 5.3 b), a
maximum of three Motor Vehicles
associated with the Home Industry
may be parked unenclosed.
Additional Motor Vehicles
associated with the use, including all
Motor Vehicles – Commercial, must
be parked in an enclosed building.
This regulation does not apply to the
storage or parking of Agricultural
vehicles and equipment.
g) Agricultural Alcohol i) Notwithstanding Sections 12.2.3.1
Production Facility a),12.2.3.2 b), and 4.12 d) an
Agricultural Alcohol Production
Facility shall only be permitted on a
lot with a minimum area of 4.0
hectares, of which a minimum of 2.0
hectares shall be used for the
growing of grapes, fruits, hops or
12.2-8
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
other produce directly associated
with on-site beer, cider, wine, or
spirit production;
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
The total maximum building area
ii)
devoted to an Agricultural Alcohol
Production Facility use shall be
500.0 square metres of gross floor
area exclusive of the basement or
cellar, of which a maximum of 25%
of the gross floor area may be used
for Retail and/or hospitality/tasting
purposes.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
h) Landscape Contracting i) Notwithstanding Section 12.2.3.2 a),
Establishment - a Landscape Contracting
Secondary Establishment – Secondary shall
only be permitted as a use
Secondary to a Nursery;
ii) In addition to Section 12.2.3.2 b):
1. On lots with a lot area of 7.0
hectares or greater, a
minimum of 65 percent of the
lot area zoned Agriculture
(A1), Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) shall be used for
the growing of plants, shrubs,
trees or similar vegetation as
part of the Nursery operation,
and may include the growing
of other Agricultural products.
In no case shall the portion of
the lot zoned Agriculture (A1),
Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) which is used for
the growing of plants, shrubs,
trees or similar vegetation as
part of the Nursery operation
be less than 3.0 hectares in
area.
12.2-9
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
2. On lots with a lot area less
than 7.0 hectares, a minimum
of 50 percent of the lot area
zoned Agriculture (A1), Rural
(A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) shall be used for
the growing of plants, shrubs,
trees or similar vegetation as
part of the Nursery operation.
In no case shall the portion of
the lot zoned Agriculture (A1),
Rural (A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) which is used for
the growing of plants, shrubs,
trees or similar vegetation as
part of the Nursery operation
be less than 3.0 hectares in
area.
iii) All buildings or structures used as
part of the Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall be
set back a minimum of 15.0 metres
from any lot line, and the total gross
floor area of all buildings or
structures used as part of the
Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall not
exceed a total maximum gross floor
area of 250.0 square metres;
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
iv) Notwithstanding Section 12.2.3.1 f),
outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall not exceed an
aggregate area of 100.0 square
metres, and shall be set back a
minimum of 30.0 metres from any lot
line and screened by a visual barrier
in accordance with Section 4.19 of
this By-law;
v) In addition to Section 5.3 b), a
maximum of three Motor Vehicles
12.2-10
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
associated with the Landscape
Contracting Establishment -
Secondary may be parked
unenclosed. Additional Motor
Vehicles associated with the use,
including all Motor Vehicles –
Commercial, must be parked in an
enclosed building. This regulation
does not apply to the storage or
parking of Agricultural vehicles or
equipment or parking of employee
Motor Vehicles.
vi) Notwithstanding v) above all
unenclosed parking areas
associated with the Landscape
Contracting Establishment –
Secondary use shall be screened by
a visual barrier in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this by-law.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015, As amended
by OMB Decision PL151130 dated March 13,
2017)
12.2.3.3 AGRICULTURAL
STORAGE
ESTABLISHMENT,
FARM PRODUCT
SUPPLY DEALER AND
LIVESTOCK
ASSEMBLY POINT
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0.4 hectares
b) Minimum Front Yard 15.0 metres
c) Minimum Side Yard 15.0 metres
d) Minimum Rear Yard 15.0 metres
e) Maximum Gross Floor 500.0 square metres
Area
f) Retail The maximum area permitted for accessory
retail sales, except a Farm Product Supply
Establishment, shall not exceed 20% of the
12.2-11
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
total gross floor area.
g) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any Front
Yard or Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 20.0
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law;
iii) Section i) and ii) above shall not
apply to the outdoor display of goods
or materials for retail purposes in
conjunction with a Farm Product
Supply Establishment.
12.2.3.4 ABATTOIR AND
LIVESTOCK
ASSEMBLY POINT
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area i) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 d), the
Minimum Lot Area shall be 5.0
hectares.
b) Minimum Setbacks i) All buildings or structures
associated with the use shall be set
back a minimum of 100.0 metres
from any lot line;
ii) No livestock shall be permitted to be
kept in any open area within 60
metres of any lot line.
c) Maximum Gross Floor A total maximum of 500.0 square metres
Area (By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
d) Retail The maximum area permitted for accessory
retail sales shall not exceed 20% of the
total gross floor area.
e) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any Front
Yard or Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 20.0
12.2-12
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law.
12.2.3.5 AGRICULTURAL
PROCESSING
ESTABLISHMENT –
STAND ALONE
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area i) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 d) the
Minimum Lot Area for an Agricultural
Processing Establishment – Stand
Alone shall be 0.6 hectares.
b) Minimum Setbacks i) Any buildings or structures
associated with the Agricultural
Processing Establishment – Stand
Alone shall be set back a minimum
of 30.0 metres from any lot line.
c) Maximum Gross Floor A total maximum of 500.0 square metres
Area (By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
d) Retail The maximum area permitted for accessory
retail sales shall not exceed 20% of the
total gross floor area.
e) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any Front
Yard or Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 20.0
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law.
12.2.3.6 KENNEL
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area i) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 d), the
Minimum Lot Area for a Kennel shall
be 2.0 hectares.
b) Minimum Setbacks i) Any buildings or structures
12.2-13
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
associated with a Kennel shall be
set back a minimum of 60.0 metres
from any lot line;
ii) No domestic animals shall be
permitted to be kept in any open
area within 60 metres of any lot line.
c) Maximum Gross Floor A total maximum of 500.0 square metres
Area (By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
d) Retail The maximum area permitted for accessory
retail sales shall not exceed 20% of the
total gross floor area.
e) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any Front
Yard or Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 20.0
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law.
f) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
12.2.3.7 SINGLE DETACHED
DWELLING AND
RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITY
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0.4 hectares
b) Minimum Lot Width 30.0 metres
c) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
d) Minimum Front Yard 10.0 metres
e) Minimum Side Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 10.0 metres
12.2-14
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
g) Maximum Capacity for Shall not exceed 10 residents.
Residential Care Facility
h) Home Business In accordance with the requirements of
Regulations Section 4.21 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
j) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
12.2.3.8 ADDITIONAL In accordance with the requirements of
DWELLING Section 4.33. of this By-law
UNIT AND ADDITIONAL (By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
DWELLING UNIT-
DETACHED
REGULATIONS
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27,
2024, not final & binding)
12.2.3.9 COMMUNITY GARDEN In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.27 of this By-law
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
12.2-15
May 12, 2021



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 123  settlement residential s1 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
12.3 SETTLEMENT RESIDENTIAL (S1) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Settlement Residential (S1) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection
or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
12.3.1 PERMITTED USES Agriculture (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Residential Care Facility
Single Detached Dwelling
12.3.1.1 RESTRICTED USES Notwithstanding Section 12.3.1,
Agricultural uses shall be limited to:
Growing of crops
Apiaries
Agro-forestry
Maple syrup production
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.3.2 PROHIBITED USES The following uses are prohibited:
a) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 1 as delineated in
Figures 5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of
Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include the
following activities:
1) storage, treatment and
discharge of mine tailings;
2) land farming of petroleum
refining waste;
3) storage of polychlorinated
biphenyl (PCB) waste;
4) application of untreated
septage to land;
5) injection of liquid waste
into a well;
6) storage of hazardous
waste;
12.3-1
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) hazardous waste
management facility;
iii) waste management facility;
iv) Salt Storage Facility that can
accommodate 5,000 tonnes
and greater;
v) snow storage facility greater
than 1 ha in size;
vi) Motor Vehicle Service Station;
vii) motor vehicle collision repair
establishment.
b) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 2, as delineated
in Figures 5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of
Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include the
injection of liquid waste into a
well;
ii) waste disposal facility.
c) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 3 as delineated
on Figure 5.0 of Schedule “F”-
Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include the
application of untreated
septage to land.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.3.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0.4 hectares
12.3-2
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
b) Minimum Lot Width 30.0 metres
c) Minimum Front Yard 7.5 metres
d) Minimum Side Yard 3.0 metres
e) Minimum Rear Yard 7.5 metres
f) Maximum Building 10.5 metres
Height
g) Maximum Capacity for Shall not exceed 6 residents.
Residential Care Facility
h) Home Business In accordance with the requirements of
Regulations Section 4.21 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
j) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
12.3.4 ADDITIONAL In accordance with the requirements of
DWELLING UNIT AND Section 4.33. of this By-law.
ADDITIONAL (By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
DWELLING UNIT -
DETACHED
REGULATIONS
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27, 2024, not final & binding)
12.3-3
May 12, 2021



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 124  settlement commercial s2 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
12.4 SETTLEMENT COMMERCIAL (S2) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Settlement Commercial (S2) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection
or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
12.4.1 PERMITTED USES Agriculture (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Catering Service
Commercial Recreation
Craftsperson Shop
Day Nursery
Farm Product Supply Dealer
Financial Establishment
Medical Clinic
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Office
Personal Services
Private Club or Lodge
Repair Service
Restaurant
Retail
Studio
Veterinary Service
Veterinary Service – Farm Animal
12.4.11 RESTRICTED USES Nothwithstanding Section 12.4.1,
Agricultural uses shall be limited to:
Growing of crops
Apiaries
Agro-forestry
Maple syrup production
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.4.2 PROHIBITED USES The following uses are prohibited:
a) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 1 as delineated
in Figures 5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of
Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
12.4-1
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act that include
the following activities:
1. Storage, treatment and
discharge of mine
tailings;
2. Land farming of
petroleum refining
waste;
3. Storage of
polychlorinated biphenyl
(PCB) waste;
4. Application of untreated
septage to land;
5. Injection of liquid waste
into a well;
6. Storage of hazardous
waste;
ii) Hazardous waste
management facility;
iii) Waste management facility;
iv) Snow storage facility greater
than 1 ha in size;
v) Salt Storage Facility that
can accommodate 5,000
tonnes and greater;
vi) Motor Vehicle Service
Station;
vii) Motor vehicle collision repair
establishment.
12.4-2
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
b) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 2, as delineated
in Figures 5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of
Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the injection of liquid waste
into a well;
ii) Waste disposal facility.
c) For lands located within
Vulnerable Area 3 as delineated
on Figure 5.0 of Schedule “F”-
Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include
the application of untreated
septage to land.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.4.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0.4 hectares
b) Minimum Yard 3.0 metres
Abutting a Street
c) Minimum Side Yard i) 3.0 metres;
ii) 6.0 metres abutting a Settlement
Residential (S1) Zone;
iii) 6.0 metres abutting a Settlement
Institutional (S3) Zone.
d) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
e) Maximum Building 10.5 metres
Height
12.4-3
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
f) Additional Regulations Notwithstanding b), c, and d) above,
for Motor Vehicle fuel pump islands, fuel pumps and
Service Station canopies shall be set back a minimum
4.5 metres from any lot line.
g) Outdoor Storage i) No outdoor storage of goods,
materials or equipment shall be
permitted;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, the
display of goods or materials for
retail purposes shall be permitted.
h) Planting Strip A minimum 3.0 metre Planting Strip
Requirements shall be provided and maintained
abutting a street, except for points of
ingress and egress and abutting a
Settlement Residential (S1) Zone or a
Settlement Institutional (S3) Zone.
i) Visual Barrier A visual barrier shall be provided and
maintained along any lot line abutting a
Settlement Residential (S1) Zone or a
Settlement Institutional (S3) Zone lot
line, in accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.19 of this By-
law.
j) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
k) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
12.4-4
May 12, 2021



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 125  settlement institutional s3 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
12.5 SETTLEMENT INSTITUTIONAL (S3) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Settlement Institutional (S3) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection
or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
12.5.1 PERMITTED USES Agriculture (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Community Garden (By-law No. 21-189,
October 13, 2021)
Day Nursery
Educational Establishment
Library
Place of Worship
12.5.1.1 RESTRICTED USES Notwithstanding Section 12.5.1,
Agricultural uses shall be limited to:
Growing of crops
Apiaries
Agro-forestry
Maple syrup production
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.5.2 PROHIBITED USES The following uses are prohibited:
a) For lands located within Vulnerable
Area 1 as delineated in Figures
5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of Schedule
“F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include the
following activities:
1. storage, treatment and
discharge of mine tailings;
2. land farming of petroleum
refining waste;
3. storage of polychlorinated
biphenyl (PCB) waste;
12.5-1
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
4. application of untreated
septage to land;
5. injection of liquid waste
into a well;
6. storage of hazardous
waste;
ii) Snow storage facility greater
than 1 ha in size;
iii) Motor Vehicle Service Station;
iv) Motor vehicle collision repair
establishment.
b) For lands located within Vulnerable
Area 2, as delineated in Figures
5.0, 5.1, 5.2 and 5.3 of Schedule
“F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include the
injection of liquid waste into a
well;
ii) Waste disposal facility.
c) For lands located within Vulnerable
Area 3 as delineated on Figure 5.0
of Schedule “F”-Special Figures:
i) Waste Disposal sites under
Part V of Environmental
Protection Act that include the
application of untreated
septage to land.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
12.5.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0.4 hectares
12.5-2
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 12: RURAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
b) Maximum Lot Area for 2.0 hectares
a Place of Worship
c) Minimum Lot Width 30.0 metres
d) Minimum Front Yard 6.0 metres
e) Minimum Side Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
g) Maximum Building 10.5 metres
Height
h) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
i) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
j) Community Garden In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.27 of this By-law
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
12.5-3
May 12, 2021



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 151  residential zones  low density residential r1 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
15.1 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL (R1) ZONE
Explanatory Note: The R1 Zone applies to low density residential areas. It
represents the predominant residential lot size in the City of Hamilton. The intent
of the R1 Zone is to permit a range of low density residential housing types to
meet the needs of the residents of the city.
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Low Density Residential (R1) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
15.1.1 PERMITTED USES Community Garden
Day Nursery
Duplex Dwelling
Fourplex Dwelling
Lodging House
Residential Care Facility
Retirement Home
Semi-Detached Dwelling
Single Detached Dwelling
Street Townhouse Dwelling
Triplex Dwelling
Urban Farm
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final
& binding)
15.1.2 REGULATIONS
15.1.2.1 SINGLE DETACHED,
DUPLEX DWELLING,
TRIPLEX DWELLING, DAY
NURSERY, LODGING
HOUSE, RESIDENTIAL
CARE FACILITY AND
RETIREMENT HOME
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 360.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 12.0 metres;
c) Minimum Setback from the i) 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.1.2.1 c) i), for lots identified
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
on Figure 36 of Schedule “F”
– Special Figures of this By-
law, a building may be
erected closer to the front lot
line in accordance with the
following:
1. Where two adjacent
lots have a front lot line
or flankage lot line on
the same street, within
10 percent of the
average setback from
the front lot line or
flankage lot line of the
two adjacent dwellings;
2. Where one adjacent lot
has a front lot line on
the same street, within
10 percent of the
setback from the front
lot line of the one
adjacent dwelling;
3. In no cases shall the
setback from the front
lot line be less than 0.5
metres.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres;
Lot Line
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
h) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 30%
ii) Within the landscaped
area, the requirements of
Section 4.35 of this By-
law shall apply.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
15.1.2.2 SEMI-DETACHED
DWELLING REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area for each 270.0 square metres;
Dwelling Unit
b) Minimum Lot Width for each 9.0 metres;
Dwelling Unit
c) Minimum Setback from the i) 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.1.2.2 c) i), for lots
identified on Figure 36 of
Schedule “F” – Special
Figures of this By-law, a
building may be erected
closer to the front line in
accordance with the
following:
1. Where two adjacent
lots have a front lot
line or flankage lot line
on the same street,
within 10 percent of
the average setback
from the front lot line
or flankage lot line of
the two adjacent
dwellings;
2. Where one adjacent
lot has a front lot line
on the same street,
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
within 10 percent of
the setback from the
front lot line of the one
adjacent dwelling;
3. In no cases shall the
setback from the front
lot line be less than
0.5 metres.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres, except for the side yard
Lot Line related to the common wall of the
semi-detached dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
h) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 30%;
ii) Within the landscaped
area, the requirements of
Section 4.35 of this By-
law shall apply.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not
final & binding)
15.1.2.3 STREET TOWNHOUSE
DWELLING REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area for each 180.0 square metres for each
Dwelling Unit dwelling unit.
b) Minimum Unit Width for each 6.0 metres;
Dwelling Unit
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
c) Minimum Setback from the 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres except for the side yard
Lot Line related to the common wall of the
street townhouse dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
h) Landscaped Area In accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.35 a)
and b) of this By-law.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not
final & binding)
15.1.2.4 FOURPLEX
DWELLING
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 360.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 12.0 metres;
c) Minimum Setback from the i) 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.1.2.4 c) i), for lots
identified on Figure 36 of
Schedule “F” – Special
Figures of this By-law, a
building may be erected
closer to the front lot line in
accordance with the
following:
1. Where two adjacent
lots have a front lot
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
line or flankage lot
line on the same
street, within 10
percent of the
average setback from
the front lot line or
flankage lot line of the
two adjacent
dwellings;
2. Where one adjacent
lot has a front lot line
on the same street,
within 10 percent of
the setback from the
front lot line of the one
adjacent dwelling;
3. In no cases shall the
setback from the front
lot line be less than
0.5 metres.
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres, and a minimum
Lot Line aggregate of 3.5 metres;
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
h) Maximum Lot Coverage 40%;
i) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 30%
ii) Within the landscaped
area, the requirements of
Section 4.35 of this By-law
shall apply.
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
j) Visual Barrier i) A visual barrier shall be
required along side lot
lines and the rear lot line
in accordance with the
requirements of Section
4.19 of this by-law.
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.1.2.4 j) i), rear yard
parking shall comply with
the requirements of
Section 4.35 d).
k) Amenity Area Amenity areas shall not be
permitted in the side yard or on the
rooftop of the dwelling.
l) Waste Storage Outdoor waste storage shall be
fully enclosed and shall not be
located in the front yard.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
November 10, 2022



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 152  residential zones  low density residential  small lot r1a zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
15.2 LOW DENSITY RESIDENTIAL – SMALL LOT (R1a) ZONE
Explanatory Note: The R1a Zone applies to low density residential areas where
lots are typically smaller than those in the R1 Zone. The intent of the R1a Zone
is to permit a range of low density residential housing types to meet the needs of
the residents of the city.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Low Density Residential – Small Lot (R1a) Zone for any
purpose other than one or more of the following uses or uses accessory thereto.
Such erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
15.2.1 PERMITTED USES Community Garden
Day Nursery
Duplex Dwelling
Fourplex Dwelling
Lodging House
Residential Care Facility
Retirement Home
Semi-Detached Dwelling
Single Detached Dwelling
Street Townhouse Dwelling
Triplex Dwelling
Urban Farm
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final
& binding)
15.2.2 REGULATIONS
15.2.2.1 SINGLE DETACHED,
DUPLEX DWELLING,
TRIPLEX DWELLING, DAY
NURSERY, LODGING
HOUSE, RESIDENTIAL
CARE FACILITY AND
RETIREMENT HOME
REGULATIONS
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not
final & binding)
a) Minimum Lot Area 270.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 9.0 metres;
c) Minimum Setback from the i) 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.2.2.1 c) i), for lots
identified on Figure 36 of
Schedule “F” – Special
Figures of this By-law, a
building may be erected
closer to the front lot line in
accordance with the
following:
1. Within 10 percent of
the average setback
from the front lot line
or flankage lot line of
the two adjacent
dwellings, or in the
case of a corner lot,
within 10% of the
setback from the front
lot line of the adjacent
dwelling sharing a
side lot line.
2. In no cases shall the
setback from the front
lot line be less than
0.5 metres.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres;
Lot Line
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
h) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 30%
ii) Within the landscaped area,
the requirements of Section
4.35 of this By-law shall apply.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
15.2.2.2 SEMI-DETACHED
DWELLING REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area for each 225.0 square metres;
Dwelling Unit
b) Minimum Lot Width for each 7.5 metres;
Dwelling Unit
c) Minimum Setback from the i) 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.2.2.2 c) i), for lots
identified on Figure 36 of
Schedule “F” – Special
Figures of this By-law, a
building may be erected
closer to the front lot line in
accordance with the
following:
1. Within 10 percent of
the average setback
from the front lot line
or flankage lot line of
the two adjacent
dwellings, or in the
case of a corner lot,
within 10% of the
setback from the front
lot line of the adjacent
dwelling sharing a
side lot line.
2. In no cases shall the
setback from the front
lot line be less than
0.5 metres
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres, except for the side yard
Lot Line related to the common wall of the
semi-detached dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
h) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 30%
ii) Within the landscaped
area, the requirements of
Section 4.35 of this By-
law shall apply.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final
& binding)
15.2.2.3 STREET TOWNHOUSE
DWELLING REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area for each 180.0 square metres for each
Dwelling Unit dwelling unit.
b) Minimum Unit Width for each 6.0 metres;
Dwelling Unit
c) Minimum Setback from the 4.0 metres;
Front Lot Line
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final &
binding)
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres except for the side yard
Lot Line related to the common wall of the
street townhouse dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
h) Landscaped Area In accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.35 a)
and b) of this By-law.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final
& binding)
FOURPLEX DWELLING
15.2.2.4
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 300 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 10.0 metres;
c) Minimum Setback from the Street i) 4.0 metres;
Line
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.2.2.4 c) i), for lots
identified on Figure 36 of
Schedule “F” – Special
Figures of this By-law, a
building may be erected
closer to the front lot line in
accordance with the
following:
1. Within 10 percent of
the average setback
from the front lot line
or flankage lot line of
the two adjacent
dwellings, or in the
case of a corner lot,
within 10% of the
setback from the front
lot line of the adjacent
dwelling sharing a
side lot line.
2. In no cases shall the
setback from the front
lot line be less than
0.5 metres.
November 10, 2022
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 15: RESIDENTIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
d) Minimum Setback from a Side 1.2 metres, and a minimum
aggregate of 3.5 metres.
Lot Line
e) Minimum Setback from a 3.0 metres;
Flankage Lot Line
f) Minimum Setback from the 7.5 metres;
Rear Lot Line
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres;
h) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 30%
ii) Within the landscaped
area, the requirements
of Section 4.35 of this
By-law shall apply.
i) Visual Barrier i) A Visual Barrier shall be
required along side lot
lines and the rear lot line
in accordance with the
requirements of Section
4.19 of this By-law.
ii) Notwithstanding Section
15.2.2.4 i) i), rear yard
parking shall comply
with the requirements of
Section 4.35 d) of this
By-law.
j) Amenity Area Amenity areas shall not be
permitted in the side yard or
on the rooftop of the
dwelling.
k) Waste Storage Outdoor waste storage shall
be fully enclosed and shall
not be located in the front
yard.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not
final & binding)
November 10, 2022



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 2 interpretationpdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
2.1 ESTABLISHMENT OF CLASSIFICATIONS AND ZONES
For the purpose of this By-law, the following land use classifications and zones
are hereby established:
a) Downtown Classification
Zones Zone Symbol
Downtown Central Business District Zone D1
Downtown Mixed Use – Pedestrian Focus D2
Zone (By-law No. 18-114, May 9, 2018
Downtown Mixed Use Zone D3
Downtown Residential Zone D5
Downtown Multiple Residential Zone D6
b) Open Space and Parks Classification
Zones
Neighbourhood Park Zone P1
Community Park Zone P2
City Wide Park Zone P3
Open Space Zone P4
Conservation/Hazard Land Zone P5
(By-law 06-166, June 14, 2006)
Conservation/Hazard Land – Rural Zone P6
Conservation/Hazard Land – Rural Zone P7
Conservation/Hazard Land – Rural Zone P8
(By-law 15-173, July 10, 2015, OMB
Approval May 3, 2016)
c) Institutional Classification
Zones
Neighbourhood Institutional Zone I1
Community Institutional Zone I2
Major Institutional Zone I3
(By-law 07-101, March 28, 2007)
d) Industrial Classification
Zones
Research and Development Zone M1
(By-law 07-043, February 15, 2007)
General Business Park Zone M2
(By-law 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Prestige Business Park Zone M3
(By-law 10-128, June 28, 2011)
Business Park Support Zone M4
General Industrial Zone M5
May 12, 2021 2-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
Light Industrial Zone M6
(By-law 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Airside Industrial Zone M7
(By-law 10-288, October 13, 2010, OMB
Approval April 10, 2015)
Airport Related Business Zone M8
(By-law 10-288, October 13, 2010, OMB
Approval April 10, 2015)
Airport Reserve Zone M9
(By-law 10-288, October 13, 2010, OMB
Approval April 10, 2015)
Airport Light Industrial Zone M10
(By-law 10-288, October 13, 2010, OMB
Approval April 10, 2015)
Airport Prestige Business Park Zone M11
(By-law 10-288, October 13, 2010, OMB
Approval April 10, 2015)
Extractive Industrial M12
(By-law 15-173, July 10, 2015, OMB
Approval May 3, 2016)
Shipping and Navigation (Port Lands) M13
Zone (By-law 18-092, April 11, 2018)
Shipping and Navigation (East Port) M14
Zone (By-law 18-092, April 11, 2018)
e) Rural Classification
Zones
Agriculture A1
Rural A2
Settlement Residential S1
Settlement Commercial S2
Settlement Institutional S3
Existing Rural Commercial E1
Existing Rural Industrial E2
(By-law 15-173, July 10, 2015, OMB
Approval May 3, 2016)
f) Utility Classification
Zones
Airport U1
(By-law No. 15-236, October 14, 2015,
OMB Approval August 22, 2016)
Utility Zone U2
(By-law No. 18-114, May 9, 2018
Parking U3
(NOT FINAL AND BINDING By-law No.
May 12, 2021 2-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
17-240, November 8, 2017)
g) Transit Oriented Corridor
Zones
Transit Oriented Corridor Mixed Use TOC1
Medium Density
Transit Oriented Corridor Local TOC2
Commercial
Transit Oriented Corridor Multiple TOC3
Residential
(By-law No. 16-265 October 12, 2016
OMB Approved May 1, 2017)
Transit Oriented Corridor Mixed Use High TOC4
Density
(By-law No. 18-032, February 14, 2018)
h) Commercial and Mixed Use Zone
Classification
Zones
Residential Character Commercial Zone C1
Neighbourhood Commercial Zone C2
Community Commercial Zone C3
Mixed Use High Density Zone C4
Mixed Use Medium Density Zone C5
Mixed Use Medium Density – Pedestrian C5a
Focus Zone
District Commercial Zone C6
Arterial Commercial Zone C7
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
i) Waterfront Zones
Multiple Residential WF1
Mixed Use WF2
Prime Retail Streets WF3
(By-law No. 17-095-LPAT-01, May 24,
2017)
j) Residential Zones
Low Density Residential R1
Low Density Residential – Small Lot R1a
Low Density Residential – Large Lot R2
(By-law No. 22-197, August 12, 2022)
(By-law No.24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
May 12, 2021 2-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
2.2 USE OF ZONE SYMBOLS
The zone symbols as set out in Subsection 2.1 may be used in text or appear on
the Schedule “A” - Zoning Maps to represent the Zones.
2.3 INCORPORATION OF ZONING MAPS
The location, extent and boundaries of all the said Zones are shown in Schedule
“A” - Zoning Maps. Maps numbered 1-228, 382-384, 412-415, 444-447, 480-
484, 514-518, 548-551, 580-582, 611-613, 642, 680, 715-716, 743-744, 749-
751, 753, 779-780, 784-785, 787-793, 817-830, 833-835, 857-877, 899-920,
941-962, 983-1006, 1027-1052, 1074-1101, 1121-1153, 1172-1207, 1226-1260,
1278-1307, 1309-1313, 1331-1353, 1357, 1359, 1363-1365, 1383-1406, 1433-
1457, 1481-1484, 1487-1506, 1528-1531, 1535-1542, 1544-1552, 1573-1574,
1580-1585, 1590-1597, 1627-1629, 1634-1641, 1670-1671, 1676-1678, 1681-
1682, 1710-1711, 1717, 1747-1749, 1784-1786, 1818-1819, 1884-1885, 1887,
1909-1912, 1932-1935, and 1954-1957 inclusive, and all notations, references
and other information shown hereon, are all hereby incorporated in and are
declared to form part of this By-law. Notwithstanding the provisions of this
Section, municipal addresses, shown on the Schedule “A” – Zoning Maps, may
be changed without an amendment to this By-law being required. The Key Maps
inserted before Schedule “A” – Zoning Maps shall not constitute part of this By-
law and have been included for reference only.
(By-law 06-166, June 14, 2006; By-law 07-049, February 15, 2007; By-law 07-101, March 28, 2007; By-law
07-111, April 11, 2007; By-law 10-288, October 13, 2010; By-law 15-118, April 10, 2015, OMB approval;
By-law 15-173, July 10, 2015, OMB Approval May 3, 2016)
2.4 INCORPORATION OF SCHEDULES
Schedule “A”, Schedule “B”, Schedule “C”, Schedule “D”, Schedule “E” and
Schedule “F” attached hereto, are hereby incorporated in and declared to form
part of this By-law.
a) Schedule “A” – Zoning Maps
b) Schedule “B” – Property Details
Where a numerical reference enclosed by a triangle appears in Schedule
“A” - Zoning Maps, reference shall be made to Schedule “B” – Property
Details, which detail more particularly shows the boundary of the zone
and the lands affected by such zone boundary. The said numerical
reference represents the map number annexed within Schedule “B” –
Property Details.
May 12, 2021 2-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
c) Schedule “C” – Special Exceptions
Where a numerical reference enclosed by a circle appears in Schedule
“A” - Zoning Maps, the Special Exception provisions as set out in
Schedule “C” – Special Exceptions apply to all of the lands encompassed
within the zone boundary denoted with the arrow indicator. The circled
numerical reference represents the subsection number in Schedule “C” –
Special Exceptions with the special By-law provisions as set out
thereunder.
d) Schedule “D” – Holding Provisions
Where a circle “H” followed by a numerical reference appears in
Schedule “A” - Zoning Maps, the holding provisions apply to all of the
lands encompassed within the zone boundary denoted with the arrow
indicator. The circled numerical reference represents the subsection
number in Schedule “D” with the holding provisions set out thereunder.
Until the "H" provision is removed from the lands through an amendment
to this By-law, pursuant to the provisions of the Official Plan, and
following completion of the matters as set out in the relevant Subsection
of Schedule “D” – Holding Provision, permitted uses shall be restricted to
only those uses referenced in said Subsection. Upon removal of the "H",
the lands may be used in accordance with the provisions of the zone
applicable to the lands.
e) Schedule “E” – Temporary Use Provision
Where a circled numerical reference followed by a “T” appears in
Schedule “A” - Zoning Maps, the temporary use provisions apply to all of
the lands encompassed within the zone boundary denoted with the arrow
indicator. The circled numerical reference represents the Subsection
number in Schedule “E” – Temporary Use Provision with the temporary
use provisions set out thereunder.
Upon the expiry of the time period authorized by the Temporary Use
By-law as set out in the relevant Subsection, the temporary use of the
land permitted under said By-law shall cease.
f) Schedule “F” – Special Figures
May 12, 2021 2-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
Schedule “F” – Special Figures exists where figures referenced in the text
provisions of this By-law are used to more clearly identify the properties
affected by the area applicable regulations required by this By-law.
2.5 INCORPORATION OF APPENDICES
The following appendices do not form part of this By-law but are included for
information purposes only. Any additions to, deletions of, or alterations to
Appendices do not require a zoning by-law amendment.
a) Appendix A - Illustrations
2.6 INTERPRETATION OF ZONE BOUNDARIES
Where any uncertainty exists as to the location of any boundary of any zone
shown in Schedule “A” – Zoning Maps, the following principals shall apply to the
interpretation of such boundary:
a) Unless otherwise shown, a street, laneway, railway right-of-way or
watercourse shall be included within the zone of the adjoining lot(s) on
the sides thereof, and where such street, laneway, railway right-of-way or
watercourse serves as a boundary between two or more zones, the
centre line of such street, laneway, right-of-way or watercourse shall be
deemed to be the boundary between zones;
b) Where a zone boundary is intercepted by a street name, shown in
Schedule “A” – Zoning Maps, the zone boundary line shall be deemed to
be a continuous zone boundary through the street name reference;
c) Where any zone boundary is not shown to be following a street, laneway,
railway right-of-way or watercourse and where the boundary appears to
follow the limit of a lot as existing as of the effective date of this By-law or
any relevant amending by-law, such lot limit shall be deemed to be the
zone boundary;
d) Where any zone boundary is left uncertain after reference to Schedule
“A” – Zoning Maps or Schedule “B” – Property Details, or the application
of Subsections 2.5(a), 2.5(b) or 2.5(c) of this By-law, and the distance
from existing lot lines or streets is not indicated on Schedule “A” – Zoning
May 12, 2021 2-6
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION
ZONING BY-LAW
Maps or Schedule “B” – Property Details, such zone boundary shall be
determined by the use of the scale of the Zoning Maps referenced
Schedule “A” of this By-law;
e) Wherever it may occur, the City Limit is the boundary of the zone
adjacent to it; and,
f) Where a lot is divided into more than one zone, each such portion of the
lot shall be used in accordance with the provisions of this By-law for each
of the applicable zones.
2.7 INTERPRETATION OF THE BY-LAW
2.7.1 Use of Tables
a) Tables form part of the By-law
b) Notations
i) Permitted Use Table
1. √ – The use is permitted
2. Blank cell – The use is not permitted
ii) Regulations Table
1. Blank cell – No regulation applies
2. Number in brackets – One or more additional regulations
apply and are listed at the bottom of the Table.
3. m – Metre
4. m2 – Square Metres
5. % – Percent
6. n/a – Not Applicable
2.7.2 Reference Aids
a) Reference aids as tables of contents, marginal notes, headers, footers,
headings, and illustrations are included in this By-law for convenience
and reference only and do not form part of this By-law.
b) For greater certainty, illustrations are used as examples to show the
application of a regulation and shall not be construed to have general
application beyond their context.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
May 12, 2021 2-7



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 3 definitionspdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
In this By-law, unless the contrary intention appears, words importing the singular
number shall include more persons, parties or things of the same kind than one, and
the converse. In this By-law, the word “shall” is to be construed as being always
mandatory and not directory.
Abattoir Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or portion thereof, for the
confinement of live animals awaiting slaughter
and slaughtering of live animals and the
packaging of animal carcasses and may
include the processing, packing, treating, and
storing of the product on the premises, but
shall not include the manufacture of inedible
meat by-products, or rendering of such
products as tallow, grease, glue, fertilizer, or
any other inedible product.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Accessory Shall mean, when used to describe a use of
land, building or structure, shall mean a use
which is commonly incidental, subordinate and
exclusively devoted to the main use or main
building situated on the same lot.
Additional Dwelling Unit Shall mean a separate and self-contained
Dwelling Unit located within the principal
dwelling and shall not include a Farm Labour
Residence.
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
(By-law No 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Additional Dwelling Unit - Shall mean a separate and self-contained
Detached detached Dwelling Unit located on the same lot
as the principal dwelling but shall not include a
Farm Labour Residence.
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
Adult Entertainment Parlour Shall mean a use which provides entertainment
or services that are designed to appeal to
erotic or sexual appetites or inclinations
May 12, 2021 3-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
provided on the premises and shall include a
Body Rub Parlour.
Agricultural Alcohol Shall mean a Secondary use to an Agricultural
Production Facility operation on the same lot, for the processing of
grapes, fruit, honey, hops or other produce in
the production of beer, wine, cider and/or
spirits. Agricultural Alcohol Production Facility
uses may include the crushing, fermentation,
distillation, production, bottling, aging, storage,
and accessory sale of beers, ciders, wines,
spirits and related products, a laboratory, an
administrative office, and a tasting, hospitality
and retail area, but shall not include a
Restaurant, a Conference or Convention
Centre, overnight accommodation or an
Alcohol Production Facility.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
Agricultural Processing Shall mean a Secondary use to an Agricultural
Establishment – Secondary operation on the same lot, for a facility
dedicated to the transformation of raw
agricultural commodities, but shall not include
an Abattoir or Agricultural Alcohol Production
Facility. Agricultural Processing - Secondary
shall be limited to the processing of agricultural
commodities grown primarily as part of the
farm operation, and may include Accessory
Retail.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
Agricultural Processing Shall mean the use of land, building or
Establishment – Stand Alone structure, or portion thereof, for a stand alone
facility dedicated to the transformation of raw
agricultural commodities and may include
Accessory Retail, but shall not include an
Abattoir, Agricultural Alcohol Production
Facility, or processing of cannabis products.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
May 12, 2021 3-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
Agricultural Research Operation Shall mean a Secondary use to an Agricultural
operation on the same lot for the study and
research of Agriculture.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Agricultural Storage Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or portion thereof, for a stand alone
facility dedicated to the storage of agricultural
products from one or more farm operation(s).
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Agriculture Shall mean the growing of crops, including
Nursery and horticultural crops; raising of
livestock; raising, boarding and training of
horses; raising of other animals for food, fur or
fibre, including poultry and fish; aquaculture;
aquaponics; apiaries; agro-forestry; maple
syrup production; greenhouse operations;
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting Facilities;
hydroponics; and other such accessory uses
as are customarily and normally associated
with agriculture, including limited value
retention uses required to make a commodity
grown primarily as part of the farm operation
salable, such as, but not limited to, grain
drying, washing, sorting, grading, treating,
storing, packing and packaging, feed mill, or
grain mill, and selling of agricultural products
primarily grown as part of the farm operation,
and associated on-farm buildings and
structures, including one Single Detached farm
dwelling and a Farm Labour Residence.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
Agritourism Shall mean a Secondary Use to an Agricultural
operation on the same lot that provides
educational and active opportunities to
experience the agricultural way of life in Rural
Hamilton. Such activities may include, for
example, farm machinery and equipment
May 12, 2021 3-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
exhibitions, farm-tours, petting zoos, corn
mazes, hay rides, sleigh rides, processing
demonstrations, pick your own
produce/products, farm theme playground for
children, and educational facilities that focus on
farming instruction, and which may include
accessory retail, but shall not include a
Restaurant or Conference or Convention
Centre.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Airport Shall mean the use of an area of land or water,
for the arrival, departure, movement or
servicing of aircraft, for which an airport license
has been issued and includes uses directly
related to airport operations.
(By-law No. 15-236, October 14, 2015)
Airport Waste Processing Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sorting and
processing of airport waste and recyclable
materials and for which a Certificate of
Approval for such purpose under Part V of the
Environmental Protection Act is required. An
Airport Waste Processing Facilities shall
include but not be limited to: thermal treatment,
blue box recyclable recovery facilities, open-air
or in-vessel organics processing, wood waste
recycling and/or a co-generation energy facility,
but shall not include a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
(By-law No. 10-288, October 13, 2010 – OMB approval
April 10, 2015)
Airport Waste Transfer Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure or part thereof, for the temporary
storage and collection of airport waste and for
which a Certificate of Approval for such
purpose under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act is required. An Airport Waste
Transfer Facility may also include limited
sorting of such waste prior to its transport.
(By-law No. 10-288, October 13, 2010 – OMB approval
April 10, 2015)
May 12, 2021 3-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Alcohol Production Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure for the production and distribution of
beer and other malt-based beverages, wine,
cider and / or spirits. An Alcohol Production
Facility may include a tasting room, tours and
limited retail sales of products developed on
site as permitted by the specific zone, but shall
not include the production of energy drinks,
sports drinks and / or soft drinks. An Alcohol
Production Facility shall not include an
Agricultural Alcohol Production Facility,
Beverage Making Establishment or
Microbrewery.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
Alternative Massage Shall mean the kneading, manipulating,
rubbing, massaging, touching, or stimulating,
by any means, of a person’s body or part of a
person’s body, but does not include such
services as:
i) performed for the purpose of medical or
therapeutic treatment provided by a
person otherwise duly qualified,
licensed or registered so to do under
the laws of the Province of Ontario; or
ii) appealing to or designed to appeal to
erotic or sexual appetites or inclinations
including but not limited to such
services advertised by any means as
“sensual”, “sexy” or by any other word
or any depiction having like meaning or
implication.
(By-law No. 10-076, April 14, 2010)
Alternative Massage Establishment Shall mean any premises or part there of
where an alternative massage is performed,
offered or solicited in pursuance of a business.
(By-law No. 10-076, April 14, 2010)
May 12, 2021 3-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Amenity Area Shall mean the area of a lot intended for
recreational purposes, and shall include areas
that are landscaped, patios, privacy areas,
balconies, communal lounges, swimming
pools, play areas and similar uses, located on
the same lot, but shall not include a building’s
service areas, parking lots, aisles or access
driveways, or Planting Strip.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Amusement Arcade Shall mean an establishment containing more
than three pinball machines, or other
mechanical game machines, or electronic
game machines provided for public
amusement.
Animal Shelter Shall mean the use of land, building, structure
or part thereof for emergency accommodation
of animals.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Artist Studio Shall mean a workplace of an artist and shall
include but not limited to a painter, sculptor or
photographer.
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
Basement Shall mean that portion of a building which is
partially below grade but which has more than
one half of its height, from the floor to the
underside of the finished ceiling located above
grade.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment Shall mean an establishment operated as an
accessory use to a detached or semi-detached
dwelling unit where guestrooms are made
available for the temporary accommodation of
the travelling public and where meals may be
offered to the occupants of the guestrooms.
Beverage Making Establishment Shall mean a commercial establishment where
individuals produce beverages for personal use
and consumption off the premises.
May 12, 2021 3-6
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Biotechnological Establishment Shall mean an establishment used for the
research, development, application,
prototypical manufacturing and production of
bio-organisms, which may or may not be used
in a manufacturing process, and shall in no
way be construed to be the slaughtering,
eviscerating, rendering, or cleaning of meat,
poultry, or fish or by-products thereof, or animal
husbandry, or the raising of animals.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
Body Rub Shall mean the kneading, manipulating,
rubbing, massaging, touching, or stimulating,
by any means, of a person’s body or part of a
person’s body appealing to or designed to
appeal to erotic or sexual appetites or
inclinations including but not limited to a body
rub advertised by any means as “sensual”,
“sexy” or by any other word or any depiction
having like meaning or implication, and does
not include a body rub performed for the
purpose of medical or therapeutic treatment
provided by a person otherwise duly qualified,
licensed or registered so to do under the laws
of the Province of Ontario.
(By-law No. 10-076, April 14, 2010)
Body Rub Establishment Shall mean any premises or part thereof where
a body rub is performed, offered or solicited in
pursuance of a business but shall not include
an Alternative Message Establishment medical
or therapeutic treatment given by a person
otherwise duly qualified, licenced or registered.
(By-law No. 10-076, April 14, 2010)
Building Shall mean a structure, whether permanent or
temporary, with walls or a roof or part thereof,
used or intended to be used for shelter,
accommodation or enclosure of persons,
animals, goods or chattels. For the purposes of
this By-law, a shipping storage container shall
be construed to be a building when located on
a lot.
May 12, 2021 3-7
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Building Code Act Shall mean the Building Code Act, 1992, S.O.
1992, c.23, or any amendments thereto.
Building Height Shall mean the vertical distance from grade to
the uppermost point of the building but not
including any mechanical penthouse or any
portion of a building designed, adapted or used
for such features as a chimney, smokestack,
fire wall, stair tower, fire tower, water tower,
tank, elevator bulkhead, ventilator, skylight,
cooling tower, derrick, conveyor, antenna, or
any such requisite appurtenance, or a flagpole,
display sign, ornamental figure, parapet, bell
tower or other similar structure. Provided,
however, where this By-law requires building
height to be calculated to determine a minimum
rear yard or a minimum side yard requirement,
building height shall mean the vertical distance
between the lowest finished grade elevation
along the lot line related to such required yard
at that point closest to the building and the
horizontal extension of the uppermost point of
the building.
(By-law No. 07-101, March 28, 2007)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
Building and Lumber Shall mean the use of land, building or
Supply Establishment structure, or part thereof, for a retail store and
any associated outdoor storage which
predominantly sells lumber and a wide range of
building and home construction materials along
with ancillary sales of construction tools,
gardening products, and home design
products.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010),
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Building or Contracting Shall mean the use of land, building or
Supply Establishment structure, or part thereof, in which building,
construction or home improvement materials
are warehoused and which may include
accessory retail.
May 12, 2021 3-8
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage Shall mean the use of land, building or
Establishment structure, or part thereof, for the bulk storage
or wholesale distribution of gasoline, oil,
petroleum products or other flammable liquids,
but shall not include a Motor Vehicle Service
Station or a Motor Vehicle Gas Bar.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Cannabis Growing Shall mean a wholly enclosed building or
and Harvesting Facility structure used for growing, harvesting, testing,
destroying, packaging and shipping of
cannabis, for a facility where a licence, permit
or authorization has been issued under
applicable federal law.
(By-law No. 14-163, June 25, 2014)
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
Casino Shall mean a building or structure, or part
thereof, in which any activity or game of
chance or skill for money as approved by the
Province of Ontario or other designated
approval authority, and may include accessory
restaurants and offices, and shall not include
Adult Entertainment Parlour, bingo hall, or
Commercial Entertainment.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Catering Service Shall mean a use where food and beverages
are prepared for consumption off-site, but are
not served on the premises or for immediate
take-out consumption.
Cellar Shall mean that portion of a building which is
partly below grade but which has one half or
less of its height, from the underside of the
finished ceiling, above grade.
Cemetery Shall mean land used for the interment of
human remains and may include a mausoleum,
columbarium, crematorium or structure
May 12, 2021 3-9
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
intended for, or used in, the interment of
human remains.
(By-law No. 06-166, June 14, 2006)
City Shall mean the City of Hamilton.
Commercial Entertainment Shall mean a use of an establishment for the
general purpose of providing entertainment or
amusement for a fee and shall include, for
example, but not be limited to cinemas,
circuses, bingo halls, dance club, cultural
events, and escape rooms. Commercial
Entertainment may include reception centres
but shall not include an Amusement Arcade,
Adult Entertainment Parlour, or Casino.
(By-law No. 06-324, October 25, 2006)
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Shall mean the use of land, building or
Rental and Service Establishment structure, or part thereof, where commercial
motor vehicles or parts for such vehicles are
stored and displayed for the purpose of sale,
lease, rental or repair.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Commercial Parking Facility Shall mean all or part of a parcel of land or
building, other than a street or laneway, used
for the parking of motor vehicles for
compensation, but shall not include any
parking spaces provided in the minimum or
maximum quantity required by this By-law for a
permitted use.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Commercial Recreation Shall mean the use of an establishment, for a
fee, for the provision of athletic and
amusement facilities involving the active
participation of the user-public in a sports-
related activity and shall include but not be
limited to such facilities as indoor and outdoor
racquet courts, fitness clubs, billiard parlour,
bowling alley, golf course, driving range,
May 12, 2021 3-10
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
skating or curling surfaces, riding stables,
water sports, go-kart track or amusement
parks, but shall not include an amusement
arcade.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Commercial School Shall mean
a) an establishment used for the study or
instruction of a performing or visual art,
such as but not limited to, dancing,
singing, acting or modelling and which is
operated on a financial profit basis; and,
b) a school where academic, vocational or
technical subjects are taught and which is
operated on a financial profit basis.
But shall not include an Educational
Establishment.
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
(By-law No. 23-079, May 10, 2023)
Communications Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the broadcasting
and production of information through various
media, and shall include but not be limited to
print, television, radio and electronic media and
which may include facilities for the printing or
broadcasting of information but shall not
include a call centre.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Community Garden Shall mean land used for the growing and
harvesting of plants, vegetables or fruits and
provided the crops are for the sole use,
donation or consumption by the individual or
individuals growing or working the community
garden. It shall not be considered as
landscaped area, landscape open space,
landscaped strip or landscaping.
(By-law No. 14-273, September 24, 2014)
May 12, 2021 3-11
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Computer, Electronic and Data
Processing Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the research,
development, input, prototypical manufacturing,
processing and printing of data and which may
include the design, manufacturing and
warehousing of electronic equipment or
software.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Condominium Act Shall mean the Condominium Act, S.O. 1998,
Chapter 19, and any amendments thereto.
Conference or Convention Centre Shall mean an establishment, which is not a
hotel, where facilities are provided for
meetings, seminars, workshops, social
gatherings cultural events and other similar
activities including an Exhibition Facility, circus,
and public hall. A Conference or Convention
Centre may include dining facilities for the
exclusive use of conference or convention
participants, and the selling of goods related to
the event.
(By-law No. 06-324, October 25, 2006)
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Conservation Shall mean the use of land, buildings or
structures for the purpose of the protection and
management of the natural environment.
(By-law No. 06-166, June 14, 2006)
May 12, 2021 3-12
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Contractor’s Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building, structure
or part thereof, by a contractor, for the storage
and maintenance of equipment used by the
contractor, but shall not include a Salvage
Yard.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Correction Facility Shall mean a facility used as a secure facility
for people who are on remand, serving a
sentence or awaiting transfer to another
correctional facility and which facility is owned,
operated, funded or supervised by the Province
of Ontario or the Federal Government, but shall
not include a corrections residence.
Corrections Residence Shall mean a group living arrangement in a
secure facility, for people who have been
placed on probation, who have been released
on parole, or who are admitted to the facility for
correctional or rehabilitation purposes, and live
together with the requirements of its residents
and accepted standards for secure detention.
A corrections residence is licensed, funded,
approved or has a contract or agreement with
the Province of Ontario or Federal
Government, but shall not include a
correctional facility, emergency shelter, or a
residential care facility.
Craftsperson Shop Shall mean an establishment used for the
creation, finishing, refinishing or similar
production of custom or hand-made
commodities, together with the retailing of such
commodities.
Daylight Triangle Shall mean a triangular area formed within a
corner lot by the intersecting street lines or the
projections thereof and a straight line
May 12, 2021 3-13
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
connecting them from their point of
intersection.
Day Nursery Shall mean a facility licensed under the Child
Care and Early Years Act which receives more
than 5 children who are not of common
parentage, primarily for the purpose of
providing temporary care and/or guidance for a
continuous period not exceeding 24 hours,
where children are,
a) Under eighteen years of age in the
case of a day nursery for children with
a development disability, and
b) Under ten years of age in all other
cases, but shall not include part of a
school provided for under the
Education Act;
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
Deck Shall mean a structure accessory to a building
with or without roof or walls, which may include
visual partitions and railings, and is constructed
on piers or a foundation at a minimum of 0.15
metres above-grade.
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
Demolition Any act or process which destroys in part or on
whole any building or structure or any act or
process which threatens to destroy a Cultural
Heritage Resource by failure to maintain it in a
condition of good repair and maintenance.
By-law No.18-114, May 9, 2018)
Development A change in the use of any land, building, or
structure for any purpose, and shall include the
carrying out of any building, engineering
construction or other operation in, on, over or
under land, or the construction, addition or
alteration of any building or structure.
(By-law No.18-114, May 9, 2018)
May 12, 2021 3-14
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Ditch Shall mean a small to moderate excavation
created to channel water.
(By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
Drive-Through Facility Shall mean a facility that is designed to allow
drivers to remain in their vehicles before and
during an activity on the site, and may include
drive-in or drive–through restaurants, retail and
service uses, but shall not include a Motor
Vehicle Washing Establishment and a Motor
Vehicle Service Station.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Dry Cleaning Plant Shall mean a building where dry cleaning, dry
dyeing, washing or pressing of articles of
clothing is conducted.
Dwelling Shall mean a building used or intended to be
used for human habitation but shall not include
a recreational vehicle or tent, or Farm Labour
Residence.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Dwelling Unit – shall mean a room or suite of
rooms used or intended to be used by one or
more persons living together as one
household, in which cooking and sanitary
facilities are provided for the exclusive use of
the household, and to which an independent
entrance is provided from outside the building
or from a common interior hallway, vestibule or
stairway.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Duplex Dwelling – shall mean a building
containing two dwelling units, but shall not
include a semi-detached dwelling.
Fourplex Dwelling – shall mean a building
containing four dwelling units with at least one
dwelling unit entirely or partially above another
dwelling unit but shall not include a street
townhouse dwelling.
May 12, 2021 3-15
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Multiple Dwelling – shall mean a building or
part thereof containing five or more dwelling
units but shall not include a street townhouse
dwelling.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Semi-Detached Dwelling – shall mean a
building divided vertically into two dwelling
units, by a common wall which prevents
internal access between semi-detached
dwelling units and extends from the base of the
foundation to the roof line and for a horizontal
distance of not less than 35% of the horizontal
depth of the building. Each semi-detached
dwelling unit shall be designed to be located on
a separate lot having access to and frontage
on a street.
Single Detached Dwelling - shall mean a
separate dwelling containing one dwelling unit.
Street Townhouse Dwelling – shall mean a
building divided vertically into three or more
dwelling units, by common walls which prevent
internal access between units and extend from
the base of the foundation to the roof line and
for a horizontal distance of not less than 35
percent of the horizontal depth of the building
but shall not include a maisonette. Each
townhouse shall be designed to be on a
separate lot having access to and frontage on
a street, laneway or common condominium
driveway.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Triplex Dwelling - shall mean a building
containing three dwelling units with at least one
dwelling unit entirely or partially above another
dwelling unit but shall not include a street
townhouse dwelling.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
May 12, 2021 3-16
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use Shall mean a room or suite of rooms used or
intend ed to be used by one or more persons
living together as one household, in which
cooking and sanitary facilities are provided for
the exclusive use of the household, and to
which an independent entrance is provided
from outside the building or from a common
interior hallway, vestibule, or stairway and shall
be located in the same building as a
commercial use permitted in the zone.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
Education Act Shall mean the Education Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c.E.2 and any amendments thereto.
Educational Establishment Shall mean a Provincially approved institution
for academic instruction and shall include a
public, private or separate school, college or
university.
Emergency Shelter Shall mean a fully detached building used for
persons in a crisis situation requiring shelter,
protection, assistance and counselling or
support which is intended to be short term
accommodation of a transient nature. An
Emergency Shelter may include an “out of the
cold” program but shall not include a residential
care facility, a lodging house, a corrections
residence, a correctional facility, or any other
residential facility which is licensed, approved
or regulated under any general or special Act.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Shall mean the use of land, building or
Rental and Service Establishment structure, or part thereof, for the display, sale,
lease, rental or repair of commercial, industrial,
farm or agricultural equipment and machinery
and which may include facilities for the storage
and sale of parts accessory to such equipment
and machinery, together with the repair,
painting and service of such equipment and
machinery.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
May 12, 2021 3-17
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Erect Shall mean, with reference to a building or
structure, to build, construct, enlarge,
reconstruct or alter, and shall include the
moving of a building or structure from one
location to another; and “erected” and
“erection” shall have the same corresponding
meaning.
Exhibition Facility Shall mean a place which is used to house an
exhibition, operated over the duration of four
consecutive weeks or less and limited to only
those exhibitors registered with the
organization holding the exhibition. The
retailing of goods, materials or services,
including motor vehicles and major recreational
equipment, associated with the exhibition may
be permitted in such a facility subject to
municipal licensing requirements where
applicable.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Existing Shall mean legally established on the effective
date of this By-law or applicable amendments
thereto.
Façade Shall mean a building wall or series of building
walls facing a street.
Façade Height Shall mean the vertical distance between the
base of the façade at finished grade level and
the lowest point of the top of the façade.
Building Base Shall mean the maximum vertical distance
measured between the base of the façade at
finished grade level to the first required
stepback.
(By-law No.18-114, May 9, 2018)
Farm Implement Dealership Shall mean the use of land, building, or
structure, or part thereof, where new and/or
used equipment or machinery designed and
used for agricultural or horticultural uses,
including machinery attachments and parts are
stored and displayed for the purpose of sale,
rental or leasing and may include a building for
May 12, 2021 3-18
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
the storage and sale of machinery attachments
and parts, and lubricants for the equipment
and machinery. The use shall also be
prescribed under the Farm Implements Act.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Farm Labour Residence Shall mean accommodation for full-time farm
labour where the size and nature of the farm
operation requires additional employment.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015 (deleted))
(By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
Farm Produce/Product Shall mean a building or structure used for the
Stand (Urban) sale of fresh fruit, vegetables, and edible plants
which are grown on an urban farm on a
seasonal basis. Products derived from the
urban farm produce may also be sold.
(By-law No. 14-273, September 24, 2014)
Farm Produce/Product Shall mean a building or structure where fresh
Stand (Rural) fruit and vegetables, flowers and plants grown
and other products derived from the
Agricultural operation on the same property are
offered for sale on a seasonal basis.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Farm Product Supply Dealer Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sale and/or
storage of seeds, fertilizers, farm equipment or
other goods or materials used in agriculture.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Financial Establishment Shall mean a use where money is deposited,
kept, lent and exchanged, and shall include but
not be limited to banks, credit unions, trust
companies or other similar banking services.
Floor Area Ratio Shall mean the figure obtained when the gross
floor area on a lot is divided by the lot area.
Funeral Home Shall mean a building or structure or part
thereof, used for the purpose of furnishing
funeral supplies and services to the public and
includes facilities intended for the preparation
of corpses for internment or cremation, and
may include a chapel and a crematorium.
May 12, 2021 3-19
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Garden Centre Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display and
sale of plants, gardening and landscaping
supplies and equipment.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Golf Course Shall mean the use of land for the purpose of
playing golf and may include such buildings
and structures necessary for the operation and
maintenance of the golf courses well as
Accessory uses such as a club house,
restaurant and a dwelling for maintenance
and/or security purposes.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Grade Shall mean the average level of the proposed
or finished ground adjoining a building
calculated along the perimeter of all exterior
walls.
Greenhouse Shall mean a building or structure used for the
growing of agricultural product that is
climatically controlled and made primarily of
translucent building material.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Green Roof A treatment to a rooftop that supports living
vegetation and includes a synthetic, high
quality waterproof membrane, drainage layer,
root barrier, soil layer, and vegetation layer.
(By-law No. 18-114, May 9, 2018)
Gross Floor Area Shall mean the aggregate horizontal area
measured from the exterior faces of the
exterior walls of all floors of a building
(excluding any cellar or floor area having a
ceiling height of 2.0 metres or less or devoted
exclusively to parking) within all buildings on a
lot but shall not include any area devoted to
mechanical equipment.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Habitable Room Shall mean any room used for living, eating or
sleeping, but does not include a bathroom,
May 12, 2021 3-20
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
laundry, corridor, cellar or other space not used
frequently or for extended periods.
Hazardous Waste Shall mean a Waste Transfer Facility, a Waste
Management Facility Processing Facility or a Waste Disposal Facility
that handles Hazardous Waste and for which
an Environmental Compliance Approval for
such purpose under Part V of the
Environmental Protection Act is required. A
Hazardous Waste Management Facility may
also include the storage, transfer or processing
of non-hazardous waste.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
Hazardous Waste Shall mean materials that are defined as
Hazardous Waste under Ontario Regulation
347 to the Environmental Protection Act.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Health Professional Shall mean an individual who practices any of
the health disciplines regulated under a
Provincial Act, such as, but not limited to,
physicians, dentists, optometrists, pharmacists,
physiotherapists, chiropractors and
psychologists, and disciplines not regulated
under a Provincial Act such as an Osteopath.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Highway Traffic Act Shall mean the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. H.8 or any amendments thereto.
Home Business Shall mean a use conducted as a business in a
dwelling unit which is secondary to the use of
the dwelling unit as a private residence.
Home Furnishing Shall mean the use of land, building or
Retail Establishment Structure, or part thereof, for the sale or rental
of home furnishings and related supplies,
materials or fixtures.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Home Improvement Supply Shall mean a retail store predominantly selling
Establishment a focused range of building supplies including,
but not limited to paints, carpets, tiles,
bathroom fixtures, lighting fixtures, and similar
May 12, 2021 3-21
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
products.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Home Industry Shall mean a Secondary use to an Agricultural
operation on the same lot, which is limited to a
use directly related to Agriculture such as the
repair of agricultural equipment, or a
Craftsperson Shop, Tradespersons Shop, or
artisans studio, together with the retailing of
commodities produced, but shall not include a
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair Establishment,
Motor Vehicle Service Station, Motor Vehicle
Wrecking Establishment, or Contractor’s
Establishment.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Hotel Shall mean a commercial establishment used
for temporary rental sleeping accommodation
for travellers and which may offer other
facilities such as personal service
establishments, restaurants, retail stores,
conference or convention facilities, exhibition
facilities, commercial entertainment or
commercial recreation, but shall not include a
Casino, and for the purposes of this By-law a
motel, motor hotel or an apartment hotel shall
be deemed to be a “hotel”.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Household Shall mean one or more persons living together
as a single, non-profit housekeeping unit,
sharing all areas of the dwelling unit and may,
in addition, be designed to accommodate
lodging units containing less than four
residents.
Industrial Administrative Office Shall mean an office for the management of
administration of Manufacturing
establishments.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Kennel Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the breeding,
raising, training, sheltering or boarding of dogs,
cats and other domestic animals, but shall not
include Veterinary Service and Veterinary
May 12, 2021 3-22
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Service – Farm Animal, or the keeping of farm
animals as part of an Agricultural operation.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Laboratory Shall mean a building or part thereof, used for
scientific or technical research, testing,
evaluation or redevelopment.
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
Labour Association Hall Shall mean the use of land, building, or
structure, or part thereof, as a meeting place by
labour or trade unions and which is operated
for the exclusive use of members and their
guests and is not open to the general public on
an equal basis, and which may include but not
be limited to administrative offices, training
facilities and meeting rooms. A Labour
Association Hall may also include a Trade
School.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Landscaped Area Shall mean any portion of a lot which:
a) Contains no building thereon;
b) Is not used for parking, access to
parking, driveways or loading space;
c) Is used for the purpose of landscaping;
and,
d) Landscaped areas may include bell
pedestals and light standards but shall
not include courier or mail boxes.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Landscaped Parking Islands Shall mean a curbed portion of land for the
growing of ornamental shrubs or trees, flowers,
grass, and other vegetation, suitable to the soil
and climatic conditions of the area of land for
May 12, 2021 3-23
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
the purpose of landscaping within a parking lot,
and shall include walkways, fire hydrants,
decorative walls, or features, and light
standards, and shall not form part of a Planting
Strip or Landscaped Area.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Landscaping Shall mean outdoor space for use, enjoyment
and recreation and shall include natural
vegetation areas and constructed areas such
as patios, decks, playgrounds, pathways,
outdoor recreational amenities, fencing,
decorative architectural features and retaining
walls.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Landscape Contracting Shall mean the use of land, building or
Establishment structure, or part thereof, where soil, mulch,
rock, screening and other similar landscape
materials are stored and offered for sale on a
wholesale basis and which may include but not
be limited to the storage of related equipment.
Accessory snow removal equipment shall also
be permitted.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Landscape Contracting Shall mean a Secondary use to a Nursery
Establishment – Secondary operation on the same lot, which is limited to
storage of soil, composted materials and other
soil amendments, mulch, rock, screening and
other similar landscape materials; landscape
design services and off-site landscape
installation services; storage of landscaping
and horticultural maintenance equipment;
composting and mixing of soil and soil
amendments; and Accessory storage of snow
removal equipment.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Laneway Shall mean a public highway or road allowance
having a width of less than 12.0 metres.
May 12, 2021 3-24
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Liquor Licence Act Shall mean the Liquor Licence Act, R.S.O.1990
c. L.19 and any amendments thereto.
Livestock Assembly Point Shall mean feedlots, livestock auction markets,
livestock assembly pens, stockyards, dealers in
livestock, cooperative or buying stations,
livestock shows, or other places where
livestock is assembled for the purposes of sale,
show, exchange, breeding, barter, or
transportation, and where the assembled
livestock has more than one owner, but shall
not include Retail pet stores. The assembly
point may handle one or more species of
livestock.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Local Agricultural Products Shall be defined as fruits, vegetables, grains,
seeds, flowers, herbs, dairy, fish, meat and
poultry, maple, or honey bee products that
have been grown or produced as part of
Ontario farm operations.
(By-law No. 15-107, April 22, 2015)
Lodging House Shall mean a dwelling containing one or more
lodging units designed to accommodate four or
more residents. The residents may share
common areas of the dwelling other than the
lodging units, and do not appear to function as
a household. This shall not include a long term
care facility, hospital, hotel or any residential
care facility licensed; approved or supervised
under any general or specific Act. This shall
include but not be limited to, student
residences and convents.
Lodging Unit Shall mean a room or set of rooms located in a
lodging house designed or intended to be used
for sleeping and living accommodation, which:
a) Is designed for the exclusive use of the
resident or residents of the unit;
May 12, 2021 3-25
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
b) Is not normally accessible to persons
other than the resident or residents of
the unit; and,
c) May contain either a bathroom or full
kitchen but does not contain both for
the exclusive use of the resident or
residents of the unit.
Long Term Care Act Shall mean the Long Term Care Act, 1994,
S.O. 1994, c. 26 and any amendments thereto.
Long-Term Care Facility Shall mean an institutional care facility as
licensed under the Long Term Care Act.
Lot Shall mean a parcel of land which can be
legally conveyed pursuant to the provisions of
the Planning Act.
Corner Lot - shall mean,
a) A lot situated at the intersection of two
or more streets or a lot abutting on one
or more parts of the same street where
such intersections have an angle of
intersection of 135 degrees or less; or,
b) A lot located on the curve of a street
where the angle of intersection of the
projected tangents of the street line
does not exceed 135 degrees.
Interior Lot - shall mean a lot with frontage on
a street excluding a corner lot.
Through Lot - shall mean an interior lot
having frontage on two streets.
Lot Area Shall mean the total horizontal area within the
lot lines of a lot.
May 12, 2021 3-26
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Lot Coverage Shall mean the percentage of the lot covered
by all buildings, but shall not include
swimming pools and decks.
Lot Line Shall mean the boundary of a lot including the
vertical projection thereof.
Flankage Lot Line - shall mean a lot line
other than a front lot line that abuts a street.
Front Lot Line – shall mean any lot line
abutting a street, and:
a) With reference to a corner lot, shall
mean the shorter of the lot lines
abutting the streets, except where both
lot lines are of equal length, at the
option of the owner, either of the lot
lines abutting a public street may be
considered as the front lot line;
b) With reference to a through lot, shall
mean, at the option of the owner, either
of the lot lines abutting a public street;
or,
c) With reference to an interior lot with
multiple lot lines abutting a street, shall
mean the shorter of the lot lines
abutting the street.
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Rear Lot Line - shall mean the lot line farthest
and opposite to the front lot line and whereas
in the case of a triangular shaped lot, the rear
lot line will be the intersection point of the side
lot lines.
Side Lot Line - shall mean any lot line other
than a front or rear lot line. The Hypotenuse
of a Daylight Triangle shall also be a side lot
line.
May 12, 2021 3-27
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Lot Width Shall mean the horizontal distance between
the side lot lines of a lot measured at the
required front yard. Provided, however, that in
the case of a lot which has a required front
yard of less than 6.0 metres, the lot width shall
be measured at the 6.0 metre front yard
distance.
Provided, however, where a corner lot has a
partially curved street line, the lot width shall
be measured between the point of the
connections of the projections of the street
lines a distance of 6.0 metres back from the
front lot line along the side lot line.
Major Recreational Equipment Shall mean either a portable structure designed
and built to be carried by a motor vehicle, or a
unit designed and built to be transported on its
own wheels, for purposes of providing
temporary living accommodation or
recreational enjoyment for travel, and shall
include, for example, motor homes, travel
trailers, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers,
motorized snow vehicles or other like or similar
equipment, excluding bicycles.
Major Recreation Vehicle Sales
and Service Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display and
retail sale of travel trailers, recreational
vehicles and boats and which may include but
not be limited to the servicing, repair, cleaning,
painting, polishing and greasing of such
vehicles, trailers and boats and the sale of
accessories and related products and the
leasing or renting of such vehicles, but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Dealership.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
May 12, 2021 3-28
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Manufacturing Shall mean the production, fabrication,
compounding, processing, packaging, crafting,
bottling, packing, recycling or assembling of
raw or semi-processed or fully-processed
goods or materials, and shall include but not be
limited to a Biotechnological Establishment,
Computer, Electronic and Data Processing
Establishment, Dry Cleaning Plant,
Pharmaceutical and Medical Establishment,
Printing Establishment and/or a Science and
Technology Establishment. Manufacturing
may also include a Private Power Generation
Facility as an accessory use, but shall not
include a Waste Management Facility or
Alcohol Production Facility.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
Marina Shall mean a commercial establishment or
premises, containing docking or mooring
facilities where recreational boats or boat
accessories are berthed, stored, serviced,
repaired, constructed or kept for sale or lease
and where facilities for the sale of marine fuels
or lubricants, ancillary retail sales, ancillary
restaurants and taxi and/or barging service
may also be provided, but shall not include
Marine Service.
(By-law No. 06-166, June 14, 2006)
(By-law No. 18-092, April 11, 2018)
Marine Service Shall mean an establishment or premises used
for the purpose of commercial marine shipping
activities, and shall include, but not limited to,
the embarking and disembarking of cruise ship
passengers, the towing, piloting and inspecting
of marine vessels, marine cargo and freight
handling, marine salvage and marine vessel
recovery, marine shipping agency, and boat
and ship building and repairs, but shall not
include a Marina.
(By-law No. 18-092, April 11, 2018)
May 12, 2021 3-29
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Medical Clinic Shall mean a building, or part thereof, which is
used by health professionals for the purpose of
consultation, diagnosis and/or treatment of
persons and shall include but not be limited to
laboratories, dispensaries or other similar
facilities, but shall not include overnight
accommodation for in-patient care resulting
from surgery.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Microbrewery Shall mean a facility used for the manufacture
and retail sale of beer, cider, wine or spirits,
produced exclusively for consumption on or off
site and may operate in combination with a
restaurant.
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
Mineral Aggregate Resources Shall mean gravel, sand, clay, earth, shale,
stone, limestone, dolostone, sandstone,
marble, granite, rock or other material
prescribed under the Aggregate Resources Act
suitable for construction, industrial,
manufacturing and maintenance purposes but
does not include metallic ores, asbestos,
graphite, kyanite, mica, nepheline syenite, salt,
talc, wollastonite, mine tailings or other material
prescribed under the Mining Act.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Mineral Aggregate Operation Shall mean:
a) Lands under license or permit, other than
for wayside pits and quarries, issued in
accordance with the Aggregate
Resources Act, or successors thereto;
b) For lands not designated under the
Aggregate Resources Act, established
pits and quarries that are not in
contravention of municipal zoning by-laws
and including adjacent land under
agreement with or owned by the operator,
May 12, 2021 3-30
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
to permit the continuation of the
operation; and,
c) Associated facilities used in extraction,
transport, beneficiation, processing or
recycling of Mineral Aggregate
Resources, including concrete and
asphalt recycling, and shall include a
concrete batch plant, but shall not include
an asphalt plant or the production of
secondary related products.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Mobile Home Shall mean any dwelling that is designed to be
made mobile, and constructed or manufactured
to provide a permanent residence for one or
more persons, but does not include major
recreation equipment such as a travel trailer or
tent trailer.
Model Home Shall mean a single detached dwelling, semi-
detached dwelling, multiple dwelling, street
townhouse dwelling or a block of townhouse
dwelling units used in the interim for the sole
purpose of an office and/or show room and/or
sales centre each of which shall promote the
sale of residential units within a draft approved
plan of subdivision or a registered plan of
subdivision.
(By-law No. 15-286, December 9, 2015)
Motor Vehicle Shall mean an automobile, motorcycle, motor
assisted bicycle and any other vehicle
propelled or driven otherwise than by muscular
power.
Motor Vehicle – Commercial Shall mean a motor vehicle having attached to it
a truck or delivery body and includes an
ambulance, a hearse, a casket wagon, a fire
apparatus, a bus, a tractor, and a tow truck used
for hauling purposes on a highway, but shall not
include:
May 12, 2021 3-31
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
a) a commercial motor vehicle leased for
no longer than thirty days by an
individual for the transportation of
goods kept for that individual’s personal
use or the gratuitous carriage of
passengers,
b) a commercial motor vehicle operated
under a permit and number plates that
is not transporting passengers or
goods,
c) a commercial motor vehicle operated
under the authority of an In-Transit
permit; and,
d) a bus that is used for personal
purposes without compensation.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Motor Vehicle Collision Shall mean the use of land, building or
Repair Establishment structure, or part thereof, for the repair of
damage to a motor vehicle caused by collision,
accident, corrosion or age, and which may also
include the reconstruction of motor vehicles,
the painting or repainting of motor vehicles the
rebuilding or conversion of automotive engines
or engine parts and which may also include an
accessory Towing Establishment, but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Gas Bar, Motor Vehicle
Service Station, Motor Vehicle Washing
Establishment or Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Motor Vehicle Dealership Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where new and/or
May 12, 2021 3-32
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
used motor vehicles are stored or displayed for
the purpose of sale, rental or leasing and may
include a building for the storage and sale of
accessories and lubricants for motor vehicles
and an associated Motor Vehicle Service
Station
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Motor Vehicle Gas Bar Shall mean a use on a lot, where fuel or
lubricants are offered for sale, or where electric
vehicles are charged for a fee, but where no
provision is made for the repair or maintenance
of motor vehicles and may include the sale of
foods and convenience items but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Service Station or a
Motor Vehicle Wrecking Establishment.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Motor Vehicle Rental Shall mean a premise where motor vehicles
Establishment are stored and rented to the public.
Motor Vehicle Service Station Shall mean an establishment used for the sale
of fuel, automotive accessories and/or
convenience goods, the charging of electric
vehicles for a fee, the repair or replacement of
parts in a motor vehicle and shall include but
not be limited to the repair or replacement of
mufflers, exhaust systems, shock absorbers,
transmissions, gears, brakes, clutch
assemblies, steering systems, tires, wheels,
windshields, windows and other mechanical or
electrical parts or systems, the installation of
undercoating, engine tuning, lubrication and
engine conversion or replacement but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment, Motor Vehicle Sales and
Service Establishment, or a Motor Vehicle
Wrecking Establishment.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 22-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
May 12, 2021 3-33
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Motor Vehicle Stacking Space Shall mean an area devoted to the waiting or
queuing of motor vehicles accessing a drive
through facility, separate from any aisle
providing access to and from any parking area.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Motor Vehicle Washing Shall mean a building or structure or part
Establishment thereof, used for either the mechanical or
manual cleaning or washing of motor vehicles
and shall include motor vehicle detailing.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Motor Vehicle Wrecking Shall mean the use of land, building or
Establishment structure, or part thereof, for the storage,
dismantling, crushing or demolition of
unlicensed, inoperable or derelict Motor
Vehicles or Commercial Motor Vehicles and
which may include the storage and sale of
salvaged material or parts obtained therefrom,
but shall not include a Motor Vehicle Collision
Repair Establishment, Motor Vehicle Service
Station, motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
or a Salvage Yard.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Municipal Act Shall mean the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25 and any amendments thereto.
Nursery Shall mean an Agricultural operation for the
growing of plants, shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation and may include Accessory retailing
of horticultural products grown on site and bulk
product such as, but not limited to, soil, mulch
and aggregate.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Office Shall mean a building or part of a building in
which management, clerical, administrative,
consulting, advisory or training services are
offered or performed and shall include but not
be limited to an Industrial Administrative Office
and a Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business, but shall not include a
Medical Clinic.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
May 12, 2021 3-34
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Outdoor Commercial Patio Shall mean any outdoor area used in
conjunction with any establishment licensed
under the Liquor Licence Act, where meals or
refreshments are served to the public for
consumption on the premises.
Parking Lot Shall mean an area located on a lot which
contains five or more parking spaces.
Parking Space Shall mean an unobstructed space that is
designed to be used for the temporary parking
of a motor vehicle for other than the purpose of
sale or display.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Parking Space, Electric Vehicle Shall mean a Parking Space equipped with
electric vehicle charging equipment which
provides, or which is capable of providing Level 2,
or greater, electric vehicle charging in accordance
with the SAE International J1772 standard, as
amended.
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Parking Space, Tandem Shall mean one Parking Space located
immediately behind another Parking Space,
leaving one Parking Space without direct
access to an aisle or driveway.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Performing Arts Theatre Shall mean a building or structure or part
thereof, used for the presentation of musical,
theatrical, dance, or other live performances
and may include lounges, dressing rooms,
workshop rooms, storage areas, but shall not
include a cinema.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Personal Services Shall mean the provision of services involving
the health, beauty or grooming of a person or
the maintenance or cleaning of apparel, may
include, but shall not be limited to an
Alternative Massage Establishment, Yoga
Studio, or microblading, but shall not include a
Dry Cleaning Plant or a Body Rub Parlour. (By-
May 12, 2021 3-35
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
law No. 10-076, April 14, 2010)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Pharmaceutical and Shall mean an establishment or part thereof,
Medical Establishment where research, investigation, development,
manufacturing and/or technical
experimentation, related to the medical field, is
carried out and shall include but not be limited
to clinical testing, prototype production facilities
and overnight patient accommodation related
to such research, clinical trials, investigation or
experimentation.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
Place of Assembly Shall mean a building or part of a building used
for social, literary, cultural, political,
educational, or recreational purposes, and may
include a banquet hall and Catering Service,
but shall not include a Commercial
Entertainment establishment, Conference or
Convention Centre or a Labour Association
Hall.
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
Place of Worship Shall mean a building used by any religious
organization for public worship or other
ecclesiastical functions and may include
accessory or ancillary uses which shall include
but not be limited to an assembly hall,
auditorium, convent, monastery, rectory,
cemetery, bookstore, out of the cold program,
day nursery and educational or recreational
uses.
(By-law No. 06-324, October 25, 2006)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Planned Business Centre Shall mean a group of business establishments
within an Industrial Zone which is planned,
developed, managed and operated as a unit
with shared on-site parking, and containing four
or more separated spaces for lease or
occupancy, but shall not be considered as a
Shopping Centre.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
May 12, 2021 3-36
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Planning Act Shall mean the Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
P.13 and any amendments thereto.
Planting Strip Shall mean an area of land growing ornamental
shrubs or trees or both, suitable to the soil and
climatic conditions of the area of land for the
sole purpose of providing a buffer and may
include low level architectural walls or features,
and fire hydrants, but shall not include
walkways, and sidewalks unless a walkway or
sidewalk traverses the planting strip to provide
access to the site.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Privacy Area Shall mean an open area:
a) Located on the same lot and accessory
to a particular dwelling unit, access to
which area is directly provided through
a doorway to the habitable portion of
the unit; and,
b) That is separate from and not included
with walkways, play areas or any other
communal or common area.
Private Club or Lodge Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for social, literary,
cultural, political, educational or recreational
purposes which is operated for the exclusive
use of members and their guests and not open
to the general public on an equal basis, but
shall not include a fitness club, retail or a
Labour Association Hall.
(By-law No. 06-324, October 25, 2006)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Private Home Day Care Shall mean temporary care for a fee of 5
children or less at any one time, in a dwelling
unit other than the home of a parent or
guardian of any such child for a continuous
May 12, 2021 3-37
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
period of time not exceeding twenty-four hours
and may include outdoor play areas for the
children.
Private Power Generation Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the generation
and transmission of heat, steam or electricity,
and which may include the sale of electricity
back into the grid, but shall not include a Waste
Management Facility.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Production Studio Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure or part thereof,
a) used for the creation and production of
motion pictures or audio or video
recordings and the associated
warehousing, prop and set design and
storage.
b) Digital media uses such as animation
studio, and associated software
development and processing.
But shall not include the mass reproduction of
film.
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
Provincial Offences Act Shall mean the Provincial Offences Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. P.33 and any amendments thereto.
Recreation Shall mean the use of lands for leisure, passive
and/or athletic activities, and shall include
Recreation, Passive.
(By-law No. 06-166, June 14, 2006)
Recreation, Passive Shall mean activities that involve relatively
unorganized recreational pursuits, generally in
the outdoors, such as walking, sitting and
picnicking.
(By-law No. 06-166, June 14, 2006)
Repair Service Shall mean the provision of maintenance or
repair services for goods or equipment,
May 12, 2021 3-38
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
excluding motor vehicles and major
recreational equipment.
Research and Development Shall mean the use of land, building or
Establishment structure, or part thereof, for the purpose of
conducting pure and applied research, analysis
and experimentation in any field of science,
medicine, technology and manufacturing and
shall include but not be limited to facilities such
as lecture rooms, administrative offices,
laboratories, training facilities such as lecture
rooms, administrative offices, laboratories,
training facilities, display rooms, pilot plants,
prototypical manufacturing, simulating
equipment and the like, and service and
machine shops to serve the Research and
Development Establishment. A Research and
Development Establishment shall also include
but not be limited to a Biotechnological
Establishment, Computer, Electronic and Data
Processing Establishment, Laboratory,
Pharmaceutical and Medical Establishment,
and/or a Science and Technology
Establishment.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Residential Care Facility Shall mean a group living arrangement within a
fully detached residential building for
supervised residents where supports and/or
services are provided on site, and may:
a) House residents referred to the facility
by a hospital, court, or government
agency; and,
b) Be a facility licensed, funded, and
approved by a contract or agreement
with the Federal, Provincial or
Municipal Governments.
A residential care facility shall not include an
emergency shelter, lodging house, corrections
residence, or correctional facility.
May 12, 2021 3-39
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 22-197, August 12, 2022)
Residential Zone Shall mean:
i) The residential districts in Hamilton
Zoning By-law No. 6593;
ii) The residential zones in Ancaster
Zoning By-law No. 87-57, Town of
Dundas Zoning By-law No. 3581-86,
Town of Flamborough Zoning By-law
No. 90-145-Z, Township of Glanbrook
Zoning By-law No. 464, and City of
Stoney Creek Zoning By-law No. 3692-
92; and,
iii) The residential zones in Hamilton
Zoning By-law No. 05-200.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 23-079, May 10, 2023)
Restaurant Shall mean a building where food and/or drink
is prepared and sold for immediate
consumption, either on or off site, and which
may offer commercial entertainment only if the
premises are licensed under the Liquor Licence
Act. A Restaurant may also include a night
club, tavern and bar.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
Retail Shall mean the sale or rental of goods or
materials to the ultimate consumer which shall
include but not be limited to Building or
Contracting Supply Establishment, Building
and Lumber Supply Establishment, Home
Furnishing Retail Establishment, Home
Improvement Supply Establishment, but shall
not include a restaurant, farm implement
dealership, the sale or rental of motor vehicles
and the sale of motor vehicle fuel or major
recreational equipment.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
May 12, 2021 3-40
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Retirement Home Shall mean a multiple dwelling where all
dwelling units do not contain full kitchens but
where the building provides communal facilities
such as kitchen/dining facilities, laundry
facilities, lounges and where the residents are
supervised in their daily living activities. A
retirement home may be licensed by the
municipality and shall not be considered a long
term care facility, emergency shelter, lodging
house, residential care facility or any other
facility which is licensed, approved or regulated
under any general or special Act.
(By-law No. 06-324, October 25, 2006)
Salt Storage Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure for the storage of road salt or
salt/sand mixture which is transported to the
site in bulk.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Salvage Yard Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for storing, wrecking,
dismantling, processing, recycling and selling
used goods, wares, materials and which may
include, but not be limited to household items,
clothing, furniture, paper, bottles, building
materials, scrap metal, machinery, heavy
equipment or parts thereof, and shall include
but not be limited to a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment. A Salvage Yard shall not
include a Waste Management Facility.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Science and Technology Shall mean the use of land, building or
Establishment structure, or part thereof, where scientific and
technological research, investigation,
development, manufacturing or technical
experimentation is carried out and shall include
but not be limited to facilities such as
laboratories, pilot plants and prototype
manufacturing.
(By-law No. 07-043, February 15, 2007)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
May 12, 2021 3-41
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Seasonal Campground Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure for seasonal recreational tenting and
camping facilities for recreational or vacation
purposes and may include Accessory uses
such as washrooms, laundry facilities, a
convenience store, administrative offices, utility
buildings and sports fields.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Secondary Shall mean, when used to describe a use of
land, building or structure, a use which is
secondary to the principal use of the property.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Setback Shall mean the distance between a lot line and
the nearest part of any building or specified
structure exclusive of any permitted yard
projections on the lot.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Shopping Centre Shall mean one or more buildings, or part
thereof, containing a group of four or more
separate commercial establishments, catering
to the broader shopping customer,
comprehensively planned and maintained as a
single cohesive and integrated site.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
Social Services Establishment Shall mean a building in which non-profit
services intended to promote and improve the
independence, economic self-sufficiency,
social and health development of citizens are
provided and shall include but not be limited to
clerical, administrative, consulting, counselling,
office and recreational functions for a non-profit
agency but shall not include facilities in which
overnight accommodation is provided.
Storey Shall mean that portion of a building or
structure, other than a cellar, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the
floor, roof deck or ridge next above it, except
an attic storey.
May 12, 2021 3-42
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Storey - Attic Shall mean that unfinished portion of a building
between the roof and the ceiling of the top
storey.
Street Shall mean a public highway or road allowance
having a minimum width of 12.0 metres.
Street Line Shall mean any lot line that divides a lot from a
street.
Structure Shall mean anything constructed or erected,
the use of which requires location in or on the
ground or attachment to something having
location on the ground.
Surveying, Engineering, Shall mean the use of land, building or
Planning or Design Business structure, or part thereof in which professionals
in the field of surveying, engineering, planning
or design provide technical consultation,
analysis, advisory or administrative services.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Swale Shall mean a graded or engineered landscape
feature appearing as a linear, shallow, open
channel to provide for water drainage.
(By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
Theatre A place of assembly for the purpose of
providing entertainment including but not
limited to cinemas, performing arts theatres
and cultural events, but shall not include
amusement arcade, casino, adult
entertainment parlour, dance hall or bingo hall.
(By-law No. 15-188, August 14, 2015)
Thermal Treatment Shall mean the processing of Waste into a
waste-based fuel and/or the disposal of Waste
under controlled conditions by heating or
combusting the materials and shall include
refuse derived fuel manufacturing and energy
from waste activities.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
May 12, 2021 3-43
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Towing Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the keeping of tow
trucks, and to which disabled or impounded
motor vehicles or mobile equipment are taken
or towed and stored temporarily until reclaimed,
but shall not include a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Trade School Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, in which specialized
instruction in a skilled trade is provided and
which may include but not be limited to
construction, industrial and motive power
trades and Commercial Motor Vehicle training
and which is operated on a financial profit
basis.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Tradesperson’s Shop Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, in which is provided
to the public a non-personal service or trade,
and shall include but not be limited to, a
carpenter’s shop, contractor’s shop, electrician
shop, painter’s shop, plumber’s shop or other
shops that provide an installation service.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Trailer Shall mean a vehicle that is at any time drawn
upon a highway by a motor vehicle, except:
a) an implement used for agricultural
purposes;
b) a mobile home;
c) another motor vehicle or any device or
apparatus not designed to transport
persons or property, temporarily drawn,
propelled or moved upon such highway;
and,
d) a side car attached to a motorcycle,
May 12, 2021 3-44
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
but shall not include major recreational
equipment and a commercial motor vehicle.
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
Transport Terminal Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where Commercial
Motor Vehicles, trucks, trailers, cargo ships, rail
cars or containers are loaded, unloaded,
temporarily stored, dispatched or parked for
remuneration and may include freight handling
facilities related to the trans-shipment of goods,
materials or products.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 18-092, April 11, 2018)
Transportation Depot Shall mean the use of land where commercial
motor vehicles pick up and discharge fare-
paying passengers or dispatch vehicles for
such purpose.
May 12, 2021 3-45
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
Travel Plaza Shall mean the use of land, building, structure
or part thereof, catering to the goods movement
industry and the traveling public. In addition to
the sale of fuels for motor vehicles, recreational
vehicles, commercial motor vehicles and heavy
motor vehicles and propane dispensing, a
Travel Plaza may include a retail store, a
restaurant, drivers lounge and personal service
uses accessory and subordinate to the Travel
Plaza function. Travel Plaza component uses
may include, among other things, motor vehicle
and heavy motor vehicle parking, a weigh
scale, a garage – Industrial, and a recreational
vehicle, commercial motor vehicle and heavy
motor vehicle washing establishment.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Urban Farm Shall mean land that is used for the growing
and harvesting of edible plants, vegetables or
fruits and that the edible plants, fruits and
vegetables grown on-site may be sold on-site.
It may include structures such as farm
produce/product stand, greenhouses, hoop
houses or cold frames. It shall not include a
cannabis growing and harvesting facility, an
aquaponics, or aquaculture facility, or a
mushroom operation. It shall not be considered
as landscaped area, landscape open space,
landscaped strip or landscaping.
(By-law No. 14-273, September 24, 2014)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
Urban Farmers Market Shall mean a temporary public market
operated by a community organization, or a
non-profit corporation, at which the majority of
persons who operate the stalls sell local
agricultural products, value added local
agricultural products, or VQA wines provided
the products are produced by persons who
operate the stalls.
(By-law No. 15-107, April 22, 2015)
May 12, 2021 3-46
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Urban Square Shall mean an unobstructed, publicly
accessible and predominantly hardscaped
open space located between non-residential
ground floor façade and the street line
exclusive of any driveway, aisle, or parking. An
Urban Square shall not be considered as any
required landscape area and/or amenity area.
(By-law No. 18-114, May 9, 2018)
Use Shall mean the purpose for which the land,
building or part thereof is used, occupied or
intended to be used or designed to be used or
occupied.
Value-added Local Shall mean raw local agricultural products that
Agricultural Products have been grown or produced as part of farm
operations in the City of Hamilton or Ontario
farms which have been transformed into
another product.
(By-law No. 15-107, April 22, 2015)
Veterinary Service Shall mean a use within a wholly enclosed
building or part thereof, where domestic
animals or household pets are provided
treatment by a veterinarian and may include
temporary indoor accommodation related to
treatment and/or recovery and pet grooming
but shall not include a kennel.
Veterinary Service – Farm Animal Shall mean an establishment where a
veterinarian administers care for the cure,
prevention and treatment of disease and injury
to farm animals and that may also contain an
animal enclosure for farm animals during the
treatment period.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
Visibility Triangle Shall mean a triangular area formed at the
intersection of an access driveway and the lot
line abutting a street.
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
May 12, 2021 3-47
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Warehouse Shall mean the use of building or structure, or
part thereof, for the bulk storage or distribution
of goods to industrial, commercial or
institutional business users or other
wholesalers, but shall not include the retailing
of goods to the general public. A Warehouse
may include a Mini Storage Facility but shall
not include a Waste Management Facility,
Salvage Yard or Towing Establishment.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Waste Disposal Facility Shall mean the use of land for the placement or
final disposal of Waste under controlled
conditions in order to protect environmental
and human health and for which a
Environmental Compliance Approval for such
purpose under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act is required, and shall include but
not be limited to: sanitary landfills, Industrial,
Commercial and Institutional (ICI) landfills; and,
Demolition and Construction (DC) landfills. A
waste disposal facility may also include
accessory uses including, but not limited to
energy from waste activities.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
Waste Management Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the storage,
processing or disposition of Waste or
Hazardous Waste and for which a
Environmental Compliance Approval for such
purpose under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act is required. Waste Management
Facilities shall include the following uses:
Waste Processing Facilities; Waste Transfer
Facilities; Hazardous Waste Management
Facilities; and Waste Disposal Facilities.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
May 12, 2021 3-48
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Waste Processing Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sorting and
processing of waste and recyclable materials
an for which a Environmental Compliance
Approval for such purpose under Part V of the
Environmental Protection Act is required.
Waste Processing Facilities shall include but
not be limited to: thermal treatment, blue box
recyclable recovery facilities, open-air or in-
vessel organics processing, wood waste
recycling and/or a co-generation energy facility,
but shall not include a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
Waste Transfer Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure or part thereof, for the temporary
storage and collection waste and for which a
Environmental Compliance Approval for such
purpose under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act is required. A waste Transfer
Facility may also include limited sorting of such
waste prior to its transport.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
Waste Shall mean materials that are defined as
Waste under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
Window Shall mean an opening which is framed and
spanned with glass, and may be mounted as to
permit opening and closing to light or ventilate
an enclosed space.
Yard Shall mean a space between a building on a
lot and the lot lines of the lot which shall be
open, uncovered and unoccupied by buildings
except for such buildings as are specifically
permitted in this By-law. Any yard
requirements shall be the minimum horizontal
linear distance from the lot line to the nearest
May 12, 2021 3-49
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
part of any building on the lot as measured
perpendicular to such lot line but shall not be
measured to a building required for security
within any Industrial Zone.
(By-law No. 12-132, June 13, 2012)
Flankage Yard - shall mean a yard extending
from the front yard to the rear yard of a lot
along a lot line which abuts a street measured
to the nearest part of a building on the lot.
Front Yard - shall mean a yard extending
across the full width of a lot measured between
the front lot line and the nearest part of a
building on the lot.
Rear Yard - shall mean a yard extending
across the full width of a lot measured between
the rear lot line and the nearest part of a
building on the lot.
Side Yard - shall mean a yard extending from
the front yard to the rear yard measured
between the side lot line and the nearest part
of a building on the lot.
May 12, 2021 3-50



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 4 general provisionspdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Unless specifically exempted or regulated elsewhere in this By-law, the following
regulations shall apply to all lands covered by this By-law.
4.1 PROHIBITED USES
With respect to any lands to which this By-law applies, all uses are prohibited
unless specifically permitted in this By-law.
4.2 HUMAN HABITATION NOT WITHIN MAIN BUILDINGS
No truck, bus, coach, street car body, railway car, major recreational equipment
or other motor vehicle shall be used for human habitation whether or not the
same is mounted on wheels or other forms of mounting or foundations, except
for a mobile home where specifically permitted in this By-law.
4.3 FRONTAGE ON A STREET
a) No lot shall have built upon it a building for any purpose in any zone
unless the lot abuts a street for a minimum of 4.5 metres. Provided,
however, that where a lot is separated from a street by land owned by the
City or the Province of Ontario which land is held by such public agency
for future road widening purposes or as a 0.3 metre reserve, a building
may be erected upon such lot if registered rights-of-way giving access to
a street have been granted and such access scheme is part of a
Development Agreement pursuant to the Planning Act.
b) Where a building or lot is legally tied to a common element condominium
which has frontage on a common element road that provides direct
access to a street and is registered under the Condominium Act, such
driveway shall be deemed to also be a street for purposes of applying the
provisions of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
c) Nothing in this By-law shall prevent the erection, repair, restoration, or
addition of a dwelling on an existing lot having access to a public road via
a private road subject to the provisions of the Zone in which the lot is
located. For the purposes this Section, the front lot line shall be the lot line
which divides the lot from the private road and all other lot lines shall
correspond thereto.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
April 13, 2022 4-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.4 PUBLIC USES PERMITTED IN ALL ZONES
Notwithstanding anything else in this By-law, a utility company, a communication
company, the City or any of its local boards as defined in The Municipal Act, any
communications or transportation system owned or operated by or for the City,
and any agency of the Federal or Provincial Government, including Hydro One,
may, for the purposes of the public service, use any land or erect or use any
building in any zone subject to the use or building being in compliance with the
most restrictive regulations contained in such zone for any use and the parking
requirements of Section 5 of this By-law, for such use and subject to there being
no outdoor storage of goods, materials or equipment in any yard abutting a
Residential Zone or a Downtown D5 or Downtown D6 Zone or Settlement
Residential (S1) Zone. Any buildings erected or used in a Residential Zone or a
Downtown D5 or Downtown D6 Zone or Settlement Residential (S1) Zone under
the provisions of this Section, shall be designed so as not to intrude into the
residential character of the area. This exemption for use in any zone shall not
apply to the Neighbourhood Park (P1) Zone, any use, land or building used by
Hamilton Hydro, Hydro One or any communication company or utility company
for executive or administrative offices, or retail purposes, or any land or building
used by any local School Board, University or College. (By-law No. 06-166, June 14,
2006; By-law No. 07-321, November 14, 2007; By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
4.5 NUMBER OF DWELLINGS PER LOT
a) Unless otherwise provided for in this By-law, in any zone where a single
detached dwelling, semi-detached dwelling or duplex dwelling is
permitted, no more than one such dwelling shall be erected on a lot.
b) Notwithstanding a) above, on a lot against which a Part Lot Control
Exemption By-law is registered, those parts shown on a deposited
reference plan which are intended to constitute a future lot shall be
deemed to be a lot for the purposes of this By-law, provided that such
parts are in compliance with all applicable regulations of this By-law.
4.6 PERMITTED YARD ENCROACHMENTS
No part of any required yard shall be obstructed except as follows:
a) The usual projections of window sills, chimney breasts, belt courses,
cornices, eaves, troughs and other similar architectural features,
ductwork, venting and other similar appurtenances may be permitted in
April 13, 2022 4-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
any required yard, provided that no such feature shall project more than
0.6 metres into the required yard, or to a maximum of half the distance of
the required yard, whichever is the lesser;
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
b) A fire escape or exterior staircase may encroach into a required side or
rear yard to a maximum of 1.5 metres, or to a maximum of half the
distance of the required yard, whichever is the lesser;
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
c) An unenclosed ramp for wheelchair access may encroach into any
required yard to no maximum distance;
d) A porch, deck or canopy may encroach into any required yard to a
maximum of 1.5 metres, or to a maximum of half the distance of the
required yard, whichever is the lesser;
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
e) A balcony may encroach into any required yard to a maximum of 1.0
metres, except into a required side yard of not more than one-third of its
width or 1.0 metres, whichever is the lesser; and,
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
f) A bay window or alcove, without foundation, may encroach into any
required yard to a maximum of 0.6 metres, or half the distance of the
required yard, whichever is the lesser. No such feature shall have a
width greater than 3.0 metres. (By-law No. 08-227, September 24, 2008)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
g) An existing building may encroach, or further encroach, into a required
yard to a maximum of 0.15 metres for the purpose of recladding the
building.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
h) Notwithstanding Section 4.6 d), e), and f) as it applies to the required front
yard, for lots identified on Figure 36 of Schedule “F” – Special Figures of
this By-law, the encroachment of a feature shall in no cases result in a
front yard of less than 0.5 metres.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
i) Wall-mounted electric vehicle charging equipment may encroach into any
required yard to a maximum of 0.3 metres.
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
April 13, 2022 4-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.7 REDUCTION OF YARDS FOR NON-CONFORMING LOTS
Where a lot was legally established prior to the effective date of this By-law
without sufficient lot width or lot area to meet the minimum requirements of this
By-law, a residential building or dwelling, where permitted in the zone applied to
the property, may be erected upon it subject to compliance with all other
requirements of this By-law, provided however, that each side yard or flankage
yard has a width of at least 10% of the width of the lot but in no case less than
0.9 metres, and that the rear yard has a depth of 25% the depth of the lot but in no
case less than 3.0 metres.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.8 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS IN ALL ZONES
An accessory building may only be erected or used in accordance with the
following:
a) Unless otherwise provided for in this By-law, Accessory Buildings shall
not be used as a dwelling unit.
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
b) Accessory Buildings shall not be permitted within a front or flankage
yard.
c) Notwithstanding Subsection 4.8 b), a building used as a station for
parking attendants or security personnel shall be permitted within a front
or flankage yard.
d) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law, where a zone
contains a maximum setback requirement from a street line, the
maximum setback requirement shall not apply to Accessory Buildings.
e) In the event of a conflict between regulations where an Accessory
Building is provided for a mixed use building, the most restrictive
regulations shall apply.
f) Except as permitted in Subsection 4.18 a), an Accessory Building shall
not be erected prior to the erection of the principal building or structure
on the lot.
g) All Accessory Buildings shall have a maximum height of 4.5 metres.
April 13, 2022 4-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
h) Notwithstanding Subsection 4.6a), an eave or gutter of any Accessory
Building may encroach into any required yard to a maximum of 0.45
metres.
i) Rooftop amenity area shall be prohibited on all Accessory Buildings.
j) Gazebos, pergolas, and carports shall be considered as Accessory
Buildings, but shall not be subject to the Lot Coverage or Gross Floor
Area requirements of the applicable zones in which they are located.
k) Children’s play structures and sports bleachers shall not be considered
Accessory Buildings and shall not be subject to the regulations of
Subsections 4.8.1, 4.8.2, 4.8.3, 4.8.4 and 4.8.5 or the regulations of the
zones in which they are located.
4.8.1 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO RESIDENTIAL USES
4.8.1.1 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO SINGLE DETACHED DWELLINGS,
SEMIDETACHED DWELLINGS, DUPLEX DWELLINGS, TRIPLEX
DWELLINGS, FOURPLEX DWELLINGS, AND STREET TOWNHOUSE
DWELLINGS IN ALL ZONES (EXCEPT A1 AND A2 ZONES)
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
a) The aggregate Gross Floor Area of all Accessory Buildings shall not
exceed 45 square metres or 7.5% total lot coverage, whichever is the
lesser.
b) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall not be considered as an
Accessory Building.
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
c) All Accessory Buildings having a Gross Floor Area less than 18 square
metres shall conform to the following regulations:
i) Building Setback from Minimum 1.0 metre
a Rear Lot Line
ii) Building Setback from Minimum 1.0 metre
a Side Lot Line
iii) Building Setback from 1. Accessory Buildings shall
a Flankage Lot Line conform to the regulations
April 13, 2022 4-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
for the principal use.
2. Notwithstanding
Subsection 4.8.1.1 c) iii),
where a zone does not
contain a Flankage Lot
Line requirement, the
minimum building
setback shall be 1.2
metres.
d) All accessory buildings with a Gross Floor Area greater than or equal to
18 square metres shall conform to the following regulations:
i) Building Setback from Minimum 1.2 metres
a Rear Lot Line
ii) Building Setback from Minimum 1.2 metres
a Side Lot Line
iii) Building Setback from 1. Except as required in a
Flankage Lot Line Subsection 4.8.1.1 e),
Accessory Buildings shall
conform to the
regulations for the
principal use.
2. Notwithstanding
Subsection 4.8.1.1 d) iii),
where a zone does not
contain a Flankage Lot
Line requirement, the
minimum building
setback shall be 1.2
metres.
e) Where a vehicular entrance to an Accessory Building faces a street line,
the vehicular entrance shall be setback a minimum of 6.0 metres from
the street line.
April 13, 2022 4-6
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.8.1.2 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO SINGLE DETACHED DWELLINGS AND
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES IN A1 AND A2 ZONES
a) Notwithstanding Subsection 4.8 g), all Accessory Buildings shall have a
maximum height of 6.0 metres.
b) The aggregate Gross Floor Area of all Accessory Buildings shall not
exceed 200 square metres, or 5% lot coverage, whichever is the lesser.
c) All buildings accessory to a Single Detached Dwelling shall have a
minimum setback of 1.0 metre from a rear or side lot line.
d) In addition to Subsection 4.8 b) and notwithstanding Subsection 4.8.1.2
c), where a vehicular entrance to an Accessory Building faces a street
line or where an access driveway leads to an Accessory Building which
faces a street line, the Accessory Building shall be setback a minimum
of 6.0 metres from the street line.
4.8.1.3 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO MULTIPLE DWELLINGS, DWELLING UNITS,
RETIREMENT HOMES, LODGING HOUSES, AND RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITIES IN ALL ZONES
a) All Accessory Buildings having a Gross Floor Area less than 18 square
metres shall conform to the following regulations:
i) Building Setback from Minimum 1.2 metres
a Rear Lot Line
ii) Building Setback from Minimum 1.2 metres
a Side Lot Line
iii) Building Setback from a Accessory Buildings shall
Flankage Lot Line conform to the regulations for
the principal use.
b) In addition to Subsection 4.8 f), all Accessory Buildings having a Gross
Floor Area greater than or equal to 18 square metres shall conform to
the regulations for the principal use.
April 13, 2022 4-7
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.8.2 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO INSTITUTIONAL USES IN ALL ZONES
a) All Accessory Buildings having a Gross Floor Area less than or equal to
18 square metres shall conform to the following regulations:
i) Building Setback from 1. Minimum 0.0 metres where
a Rear Lot Line a rear lot line abuts a
Laneway.
2. Minimum 0.6 metres where
a rear lot line does not abut
a Laneway.
ii) Building Setback from 1. Minimum 0.0 metres where
a Side Lot Line a side lot line abuts
a Laneway.
2. Minimum 0.6 metres where
a side lot line does not abut
a Laneway.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
iii) Building Setback from a Accessory Buildings shall
Flankage Lot Line conform to the regulations for
b) In addition to Subsection 4.8 f) and 4.8.2 a), all Accessory Buildings
having a Gross Floor Area greater than 18 square metres shall conform
to the regulations for the principal use.
4.8.3 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO COMMERCIAL USES IN ALL ZONES
a) All Accessory Buildings having a Gross Floor Area less than or equal to
18 square metres shall conform to the following regulations:
i) Building Setback from 1. Minimum 0.0 metres where
a Rear Lot Line a rear lot line abuts a
Laneway.
2. Minimum 0.6 metres where
a rear lot line does not abut
a Laneway.
April 13, 2022 4-8
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) Building Setback from 1. Minimum 0.0 metres where
a Side Lot Line a side lot line abuts
a Laneway.
2. Minimum 0.6 metres where
a side lot line does not abut
a Laneway.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
iii) Building Setback from Accessory Buildings shall
a Flankage Lot Line conform to the regulations for the
principal use.
b) In addition to Subsection 4.8 f), all Accessory Buildings having a Gross
Floor Area greater than 18 square metres shall conform to the
regulations for the principal use.
4.8.4 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO INDUSTRIAL AND UTILITY USES IN ALL
ZONES
a) All Accessory Buildings having a Gross Floor Area less than or equal to
18 square metres shall conform to the following regulations:
i) Building Setback from 1. Minimum 0.0 metres where
a Rear Lot Line a rear lot line abuts a
Laneway.
2. Minimum 0.6 metres where
a rear lot line does not abut
a Laneway.
ii) Building Setback from 1. Minimum 0.0 metres where
a Side Lot Line a side lot line abuts
a Laneway.
2. Minimum 0.6 metres where
a side lot line does not abut
a Laneway.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
April 13, 2022 4-9
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
iii) Building Setback from a Accessory Buildings shall
Flankage Lot Line conform to the regulations for
the principal use.
b) In addition to Subsection 4.8 f), all Accessory Buildings having a Gross
Floor Area greater than 18 square metres shall conform to the
regulations for the principal use.
4.8.5 BUILDINGS ACCESSORY TO AGRICULTURE, RURAL, EXISTING RURAL
COMMERCIAL, AND EXISTING RURAL INDUSTRIAL USES
a) Buildings accessory to all uses except a Single Detached Dwelling and
Residential Care Facility in an A1 or A2 Zone shall conform to the
regulations for the principal use of the applicable A1 or A2 Zones.
b) Buildings accessory to all uses in an E1 or E2 Zone shall conform to the
applicable principal zone regulations.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
4.9 MECHANICAL AND UNITARY EQUIPMENT
Hot boxes, air conditioners and pumps (including heat pumps and swimming
pool pumps) and other similar mechanical equipment shall be located only in
accordance with the following regulations:
a) Within a required front yard, provided such equipment shall have a
minimum setback of 3.0 metres from the street line, a minimum setback
of 0.6 metres from a side lot line and is screened from the street by an
enclosure or landscaping; and,
b) Within a required side yard or required rear yard provided such
equipment has a minimum setback of 0.6 metres from the side lot line or
rear lot line.
(By-law No. 06-324, October 25, 2006)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
4.10 SATELLITE DISHES
Satellite dishes shall be permitted in all zones. Satellite dishes within a
Residential Zone, Downtown D5 Zone, Downtown D6 Zone or Institutional Zone
that are greater than 1.0 metre in diameter shall be subject to the following:
April 13, 2022 4-10
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 07-101, March 28, 2007)
a) Only one such satellite shall be permitted on any lot;
b) Shall not be located in any front yard;
c) Shall not be located beyond the distance of any minimum side yard or
minimum rear yard required by this By-law;
d) May be located on the roof-top of a multiple dwelling provided the satellite
dish is less than 3.7 metres in diameter; and,
e) Shall be restricted to a maximum height of 4.5 metres measured from the
base to the uppermost point of the satellite dish.
4.11 SWIMMING POOLS AND HOT TUBS/SPAS
An outdoor swimming pool or hot tub/spa may be located in any yard except the
required front yard and shall be located a minimum of 1.25 metres from any lot
line, measured from the water’s edge to the lot line.
4.12 VACUUM CLAUSE
a) Downtown Zones
i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within any
Downtown Zones and the location thereon of any residential building
or building accessory thereto, existing on the effective date of this By-
law, shall be deemed to comply with the regulations for any required
setbacks, front yard, side yard, rear yard, lot width and building height
relative only to the use existing on the effective date of this By-law
and subject to such existing use being permitted by this By-law;
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
ii) Nothing in Subsection a) (i) shall apply to any satellite dish, air-
conditioning-unit, heat pump unit, swimming pool, hot tub/spa or to
any fence in contravention of the City’s Fence By-law and Swimming
Pool Enclosure By-law;
iii) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within
any Downtown Zones upon which a residential building exists on the
effective date of this By-law, such lot shall be deemed to comply with
April 13, 2022 4-11
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
the lot area regulation relative only to the use existing on the effective
date of this By-law provided that:
1. Such existing use is permitted by this By-law; and.
2. The lot area is not less than 90% of that otherwise required
by this By-law;
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
iv) Nothing in Subsection a) (iii) shall permit a reduction in a lot area
from that existing on the effective date of this By-law, to a lot area
which is less than that prescribed by the relevant minimum lot area
regulation;
b) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the Downtown Zones and
Institutional Zones of this By-law, building heights existing on the effective
date of this By-law shall be deemed to comply with the regulations for
building heights and are permitted by this By-law.
(By-law No. 07-101, March 28, 2007)
c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within the
Industrial Zones of this By-law and the location thereon of any building or
structure, existing on the effective date of this By-law, shall be deemed to
comply with the regulations for any required setbacks, front yard,
flankage yard, rear yard, lot width, lot area and building height and are
permitted by this By-law.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
d) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within the
Rural Zones of this By-law, and the location thereon of any building or
structure, existing on the effective date of this By-law, shall be deemed to
comply with the regulations for any required setbacks, front yard,
flankage yard, rear yard, lot width, lot area, and building height and are
permitted by this By-law.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
e) Transit Oriented Corridor Zones
i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within
April 13, 2022 4-12
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
the Transit Oriented Corridor Zones of this By-law, and the
location thereon of any building or structure, existing on the
effective date of this By-law, shall be deemed to comply with the
regulations for any required setbacks, front yard, flankage yard,
rear yard, lot width, lot area, and building height and are
permitted by this By-law.
ii) In addition to Subsection i), and notwithstanding Subsections
11.4.3 a) i), 11.4.3 d) i), and 11.4.3 g) ii) and iii), within the lands
zoned Transit Oriented Corridor Mixed Use High Density (TOC4)
Zone, an addition or alteration to an existing commercial building,
to a maximum of 10% of the existing Gross Floor Area existing on
the date of passing of this By-law, shall be permitted.
(By-law No. 18-032, February 14, 2018)
f) Commercial and Mixed Use Zones
i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within
the Commercial and Mixed Use Zones of this By-law and the
location thereon of any building or structure, existing on the
effective date of this By-law, shall be deemed to comply with the
regulations for any required setbacks, front yard, façade building
length, flankage yard, rear yard, lot width, lot area and building
height and are permitted by this By-law.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
ii) In addition to Section 4.12 f)i) and notwithstanding Sections
10.3.3 a)ii), 10.4.3 a)i), 10.5.3 a)ii) and 10.6.3 a)ii), Sections
10.4.3 d)i), 10.5.3 d)i), 10.5a.3 d)i) and Sections 10.3.3 i) ii) and
iii), 10.5.3 g) ii) and iii), 10.5a.3 g) ii) and iii), and 10.6.3 g) ii) and
iii), within the lands zoned, Community Commercial (C3) Zone,
Mixed Use High Density (C4) Zone, Mixed Use Medium Density
(C5) Zone, Mixed Use Medium Density – Pedestrian Focus (C5a)
Zone, or District Commercial (C6) Zone, an addition or alteration
to a legally existing commercial building, to a maximum of 10% of
the existing Gross Floor Area existing on the date of the passing
of the By-law, shall be permitted.
(By-law No. 17-240-OLT-05, March 14, 2022)
iii) In addition to Section 4.12.f)ii), an addition or alteration to an
existing building shall be permitted to replace the existing legally
established parking spaces prior to the addition provided the
April 13, 2022 4-13
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
minimum legally established parking requirements are exceeded.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
g) Parking Space Size for All Zones
i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, parking
spaces located within any zone and approved after May 25, 2005
and prior to the effective date of this By-law shall be deemed to
comply with the regulations for the length and width and are
permitted by this By-law.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
ii) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, parking
spaces located within any D1, D2 or D5 Zone and approved or
subject to a Formal Consultation request or Development
Application after May 25, 2005 and prior to the effective date of
the By-law No. 18-114, being the 9th day of May 2018, be
recognized and deemed to comply with the Zoning By-law
regulations in terms of length, width and are permitted by this By-
law
(By-law No.18-114, May 09, 2018)
h) Notwithstanding Sections 1.4 and 1.7 of this By-law, a Building Permit for
an Additional Dwelling Unit may be issued in accordance with any minor
variance, site specific zoning, or site plan that has been approved or
conditionally approved by the City of Hamilton or the Local Planning Area
Tribunal as it read on the day before By-law 21-071 was passed by
Council, provided the Building Permit application complies with Zoning
By-law 05-200, as amended, that affected the lot before By-law No. 21-
071 came into effect. For the purposes of determining zoning conformity
the following provisions shall apply:
i) This By-law is deemed to be modified to the extent necessary to
permit a building or structure that is erected in accordance with
Subsection h) above.
ii) Once the permit or approval under Subsection h) above, has
been granted, the provisions of this By-law apply in all other
respects to the land in question.
(By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
April 13, 2022 4-14
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
i) Notwithstanding Sections 1.4 and 1.7 of this By-law, a Building Permit for
an Accessory Building may be issued in accordance with any minor
variance, site specific zoning, or site plan that has been approved or
conditionally approved by the City of Hamilton or the Ontario Land
Tribunal as it read on the day before By-law 21-070 was passed by
Council, provided the Building Permit application complies with Zoning
By-law 05-200, as amended, that affected the lot before By-law No. 21-
070 came into effect. For the purposes of determining zoning conformity
the following provisions shall apply:
i) This By-law is deemed to be modified to the extent necessary to
permit a building or structure that is erected in accordance with
Subsection i) above.
ii) Once the permit or approval under Subsection i) above, has been
granted, the provisions of this By-law apply in all other respects to
the land in question.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
j) Residential Zones
i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot within
a Residential Zone and the location thereon of any building or
structure existing on the effective date of this By-law, shall be
deemed to comply with the regulations of this By-law and are
permitted by this By-law.
(By-law No. 22-197, August 12, 2022)
4.13 REDUCTION IN REGULATIONS RESULTING FROM STREET WIDENING
No person shall have deemed to have contravened any provisions of this By-law
by reason only of the fact that a part or parts of any lot has or have been
conveyed to or acquired by the City of Hamilton or the Government of Ontario
for public road allowance purposes.
4.14 LANEWAYS DEEMED TO BE STREETS
The following laneways are deemed to be streets for the purposes of applying
the provisions of this By-law;
Renfrew Avenue
April 13, 2022 4-15
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Woodland Avenue
Dexter Avenue
Wright's Lane
Trafalgar Boulevard
Turner's Lane
Dynes Park
Patterson Street
Clarence Street
Whitehern Place
Hunter Place
Wesanford Place
Tecumseh Street
Crooks Street
Little Greig Street
Nelson Street
Richmond Street
Hill Street
Blanchard Street
Fanning Street
Bold Street
Pearl Street South
Tuckett Street
Woodbine Crescent
Spring Street
Ford Street
Patrick Street
Beckley Street
Sawyer Road
Evans Street
Radial Street
Birch Avenue
Beck Street
April 13, 2022 4-16
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Normajean Avenue
Holland Road
Courtland Avenue
Bull's Lane
Rosscliffe Drive
Malta Drive
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.15 MODEL HOMES IN PLANS OF SUBDIVISION
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, where a subdivision
agreement has been executed (signed) by the owner, more than one model
home may be constructed on a lot prior to registration of the plan of subdivision
or on a lot or block within a registered plan of subdivision subject to the following
restrictions:
a) The use shall be permitted in the zone in which the dwelling is to be
located;
b) Each dwelling unit shall be used for the purpose of a model home only
and shall not be occupied as a dwelling unit prior to the date of the
registration of the subdivision plan;
c) For the purpose of this Section, a “multiple dwelling” shall only include
that form of housing type commonly described as a block or cluster
townhouse;
d) The maximum number of model homes shall not exceed 10% of the total
number of lots intended for single detached dwellings, semi-detached
dwellings or townhouse dwelling unit purposes within the draft approved
plan of subdivision or registered plan of subdivision, to a maximum of 20
dwelling units;
e) The model home shall comply with all other provisions of this By-law, as
though the dwellings and/or units were constructed on the lot within the
registered plan of subdivision; and,
f) The model home shall comply with all applicable terms and conditions of
the said subdivision agreement.
(By-law No. 15-286, December 9, 2015)
April 13, 2022 4-17
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.16 REGULATION FOR CONSOLIDATED LOT DEVELOPMENT
a) Where two or more abutting lots under one identical ownership are
consolidated for the purpose of development, the internal lot lines of the
original lots shall not be construed to be lot lines for the purposes of any
zoning regulations provided that all applicable regulations of this By-law
relative to the consolidated lot development and its external lot lines are
complied with.
b) Where a comprehensive condominium plan of subdivision has received
draft plan approval or a conditional stratified severance has been
approved, as well as any required site plan approval, and where
registration of the plan is intended to occur in phases and/or stages, the
lands to which the draft approved plan of condominium is to be located,
shall be deemed to be one lot for the purposes of applying the provisions
of the By-law. Zoning provisions shall apply only to the external lot lines
of the overall condominium plan, not to internal lot lines resulting from the
registration of any condominium phase.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.17 AIRPORT
All development in the City of Hamilton shall comply with the Hamilton Airport
Zoning (Height) Regulations established by Transport Canada, which are
registered at the local Land Titles Office and which may be amended from time
to time. No projections shall be permitted beyond this maximum height.
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
4.18 TEMPORARY USES
Nothing in this By-law shall prevent the use of any land or erection or use of any
building for:
a) A construction camp, construction trailer, work camp, tool shed, scaffold
or other temporary building incidental to and accessory for construction
work on the premises, but only for so long as may be reasonably
necessary to complete such construction;
b) A temporary sales office incidental to the sale of dwelling unit(s) shall
comply with all regulations for any dwelling type required by the zone in
which it is located;
April 13, 2022 4-18
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 08-227, September 24, 2008)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
c) Temporary retailing in a Downtown D1, D2, D3 or D4 Zone, in a Transit
Oriented Corridor TOC1, TOC2, TOC3 or TOC4 Zone, or in a
Commercial Mixed Use C1, C2, C3, C4, C5, C5a, C6, and C7 Zone in
accordance with the following provisions:
i) The retail use shall not be in operation for more than 5 consecutive
days;
ii) Seasonal Garden Centres, including the retail sales of Christmas
trees, are subject to the following:
1. Shall not be in operation for more than 120 days annually;
2. Shall not be located in a landscaped area or planting strip;
3. Shall not occupy more than 10% of the total number of provided
parking spaces and shall not obstruct the manoeuvring area of
any parking or loading space; and,
4. Shall not occupy areas devoted to barrier-free parking space(s)
or loading space(s).
(By-law No. 16-265, October 12, 2016)
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
(By-law No. 18-032, February 14, 2018)
iii) Notwithstanding Subsection 4.18 c) i), retailing of fireworks on
Victoria Day, Canada Day, and during the seven day period
immediately preceding each of those days.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
d) Temporary tent(s) or stage(s) in a Downtown Zone, Transit Oriented
Corridor Zone, Commercial and Mixed Use Zone, Institutional Zone or in
a Parking (U3) Zone, Neighbourhood Park (P1) Zone, Community Park
(P2) Zone, City Wide Park (P3) Zone, Open Space (P4) Zone, in
accordance with the following provisions:
i) Shall not be in operation for more than 5 consecutive days;
ii) Shall not be subject to any minimum or maximum yard setbacks or
April 13, 2022 4-19
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
parking requirements of the zone;
iii) Notwithstanding ii) above, minimum setbacks shall apply if
abutting a Residential Zone; and,
iv) Shall not occupy areas devoted to barrier-free parking space(s) or
loading space(s).
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
Please refer to Temporary Use 8 in Schedule “E” to Zoning By-law
No. 05-200 for temporary tents located in the following zones:
Downtown Central Business District (D1) Zone, Downtown Mixed Use –
Pedestrian Focus (D2) Zone, Downtown Mixed Use (D3) Zone,
Community Park (P2) Zone, City Wide (P3) Zone, Neighbourhood
Commercial (C2) Zone, Community Commercial (C3) Zone, Mixed Use
High Density (C4) Zone, Mixed Use Medium Density (C5) Zone, Mixed
Use Medium Density - Pedestrian Focus (C5a) Zone, District Commercial
(C6) Zone, Arterial Commercial (C7) Zone, Transit Oriented Corridor
Mixed Use Medium Density (TOC1) Zone, Transit Oriented Corridor
Local Commercial (TOC2) Zone, Transit Oriented Corridor Mixed Use
High Density – Pedestrian Focus (TOC4) Zone, Neighbourhood
Institutional (I1) Zone, Community Institutional (I2) Zone and Major
Institutional (I3) Zone, Research and Development (M1) Zone, General
Business Park (M2) Zone, Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, Business
Park Support (M4) Zone, General Industrial (M5) Zone, Light Industrial
(M6) Zone, Airside Industrial (M7) Zone, Airport Related Business (M8)
Zone, Airport Light Industrial (M10) Zone, Airport Prestige Business (M11)
Zone, Shipping and Navigation (Port Lands) (M13) Zone, Shipping and
Navigation (East Port) (M14) Zone.
e) Temporary Performance Arts Theatre within an existing Educational
Establishment or Place of Worship, in a Community Institutional (I2)
Zone, and Major Institutional (I3) Zone for a maximum of five consecutive
days and shall not be subject to parking requirements.
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
f) Trailers used to provide a temporary restaurant service while the
associated principal restaurant building is undergoing renovation,
restoration, or construction for a maximum of four months, shall not be
subject to parking requirements provided the Gross Floor Area of the
temporary trailer does not exceed the Gross Floor Area of the principal
April 13, 2022 4-20
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
restaurant.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
4.19 VISUAL BARRIER
Where this By-law requires a visual barrier to be provided and maintained, such
barrier shall act as a screen between uses and be constructed to a minimum
height of 1.8 metres, and to a maximum height of 2.5 metres where a visual
barrier consists of a fence or wall and shall not be located within 3.0 metres of a
street line. A visual barrier shall consist of the following:
a) A wall, fence;
b) A continuous planting of suitable trees or shrubs, together with a
reserved width of planting area appropriate for healthy plant growth;
c) Earth berms; or,
d) Any combination of the above.
(By-law No. 08-227, September 24, 2008)
(By-law No. 10-076, April 14, 2010)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
4.20 OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL PATIOS
Please refer to Temporary Use 6 in Schedule “E” to Zoning By-law No. 05-200 for
outdoor commercial patios located in the following zones: Downtown Central
Business District (D1) Zone, Downtown Prime Retail Streets (D2) Zone, Downtown
Mixed Use (D3) Zone, Community Commercial (C2) Zone, Community Commercial
(C3) Zone, Mixed Use High Density (C4) Zone, Mixed Use Medium Density (C5) Zone,
Mixed Use Medium Density - Pedestrian Focus (C5a) Zone, District Commercial (C6)
Zone, Arterial Commercial (C7) Zone, Mixed Use (TOC1) Zone, Local Commercial
(TOC2) Zone, Mixed Use High Density (TOC4) Zone.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor Commercial Patio,
inclusive of all outdoor areas and portions of the patio that cross property lines
such as road allowances, shall comply with the following:
April 13, 2022 4-21
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Commercial Patios shall be designed and used to accommodate
seating of customers.
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
An Outdoor Commercial Patio shall be limited to a seated capacity of a
minimum of 1.10 square metres of patio area per person.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no outdoor patio
shall be permitted on a lot where any lot line abuts a Residential
Zone, Downtown D5 or Downtown D6 Zone or where such lot is
separated from a Residential Zone, Downtown D5 or Downtown
D6 Zone by a laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone, Downtown
D5 or Downtown D6 Zone or the lot is separated from the
Residential Zone, Downtown D5 or Downtown D6 Zone by a
laneway, an outdoor patio shall be permitted in the front yard.
(By-law No. 09-210, September 30, 2009)
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 15-072, March 11, 2015)
(By-law No. 22-075, April 13, 2022)
4.21 HOME BUSINESS
No person shall conduct a home business except as permitted:
a) Home Businesses permitted in Single Detached Dwellings and Semi-
Detached Dwellings:
i) Academic Instruction (not more than one student at a time);
ii) Studio, excluding accessory retail or an establishment used for the
making or transmission of motion pictures, radio or television
programs;
iii) Office;
April 13, 2022 4-22
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
iv) Personal Service;
v) Catering business, excluding any on-site retail;
vi) Private Home Day Care;
vii) Repair service;
viii) Bed and Breakfast Establishment with a maximum of 3
guestrooms;
ix) Craftsperson Shop, excluding accessory retail; and,
x) Within the A1, A2, S1 and P6 Zones, an office of 1 health
professional, physician or dentist existing at the time of passing of
this By-law.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
b) Regulations for Home Businesses in Single Detached Dwellings and
Semi-Detached Dwellings:
i) Except in addition to an office, not more than one home business
per dwelling unit shall be permitted;
ii) No more than one non-resident employee shall be permitted;
iii) Parking shall be provided at a rate of one space for each dwelling
unit; one space for the non-resident employee; and one space for
each home business, except as follows:
1. For an office conducted in such a manner so as not to
attract customers or clients directly to the dwelling unit,
there shall be provided only one space for each dwelling
unit and one space for any non-resident employee; and,
2. For a Bed and Breakfast Establishment, there shall be
provided one space for each dwelling unit, one space for
any non-resident employee and one space for each
guestroom.
3. Notwithstanding anything else in this By-law, parking
April 13, 2022 4-23
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
spaces required for a home business and the dwelling shall
be permitted in the form of tandem parking spaces.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
iv) No outdoor storage shall be permitted;
v) There shall be no display of product to indicate to persons outside
the premises that any part of the premises is being used for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling;
vi) The total floor area used for a home business, excluding a Bed
and Breakfast Establishment, shall not exceed 25% of the gross
floor area of the dwelling unit or 50 square metres, whichever is
the lesser amount. This requirement shall apply whether the home
business is carried out in the dwelling unit or in an accessory
building, or both;
vii) No noise, vibration, fumes, odour, dust or glare emitted to the
environment outside of the building shall be permitted, beyond
which is normally associated with a dwelling unit;
viii) No repair of equipment having a combustion engine shall be
permitted nor shall any such equipment be used in the process of
conducting any home business;
ix) No repair of parts or accessories for motor vehicles or major
recreational equipment shall be permitted;
x) No repair service shall be conducted in an accessory building,
except for the purpose of indoor storage accessory to the repair
service;
xi) Not more than one parking space required for, or associated with,
a home business may be located in the rear yard, except in the
case of a corner lot or a lot abutting a laneway; and,
xii) A hair dresser or barber shall be limited to a maximum of one hair
washing sink and one styling station;
c) Home Businesses permitted in Duplex Dwellings, Dwelling Unit(s),
Multiple Dwellings and Street Townhouses:
April 13, 2022 4-24
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
i) Academic instruction (no more than one student at a time);
ii) Craftsperson Shop (excluding accessory retail);
iii) Office
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
d) Regulations for Home Businesses in Duplex Dwellings, Dwelling Unit(s),
Triplex Dwellings, Fourplex Dwellings, Multiple Dwellings and Street
Townhouse Dwellings:
i) A home business shall only be conducted by the person or
persons residing in the dwelling unit;
ii) Only one home business shall be permitted for each dwelling unit
and the gross floor area of such use shall not exceed 15.0 square
metres;
iii) No noise, vibration, fumes, odour, dust or glare emitted to the
environment outside of the building shall be permitted, beyond
which is normally associated with a dwelling unit;
iv) No outdoor storage shall be permitted;
v) There shall be no display of product to indicate to persons outside
the premises that any part of the premises is being used for any
purpose other than that of a dwelling; and,
vi) No additional parking is required for the home business.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
e) A home business within a Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use shall not be
permitted.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
4.22 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 4.15 – Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision, no
buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
April 13, 2022 4-25
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate; or,
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing or
have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building
Official and all regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and Economic
Development Department and/or his or her designate;
iii) For lands in a Rural zone,
1) An approved waste disposal and water supply systems to
sustain the use of land for buildings shall be provided and
maintained to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official;
and,
2) All regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate.
iv) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received
to the satisfaction of the General Manager of Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate.
(By-law No. 06-038, March 1, 2006)
(By-law No. 14-238, September 10, 2014)
(By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
4.23 SPECIAL SETBACKS
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law, the following Special
Setbacks shall apply:
April 13, 2022 4-26
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
a) Setback from a Provincial Highway Right-of-Way
All buildings, structures, required parking areas and storm water
management facilities located on a property shall be setback a minimum
of 14.0 metres from a Provincial Highway Right-of-Way.
b) Setback from a Railway Right-of-Way
All buildings or structures within a Residential Zone or an Institutional
Zone shall be setback a minimum of 30.0 metres from a Railway Right-of-
Way.
c) Setback from a Pipeline Right-of-Way
All buildings or structures located on a property shall be setback a
minimum of 10.0 metres from a Pipeline Right-of-Way.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
d) Setback from a Conservation/Hazard Land (P5) Zone,
Conservation/Hazard Land Rural (P7) Zone and
Conservation/Hazard Land Rural (P8) Zone
All buildings or structures located on a property shall have a minimum
setback of 7.5 metres from a P5, P7 and P8 Zone boundary, which is
determined by flood and fill line mapping as prepared by the
Conservation Authority having jurisdiction and amended from time to
time.
e) Setback from the Lincoln Alexander Parkway
i) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, all structures
shall be set back a minimum 15.24 metres from the Lincoln
Alexander Parkway Right-of-Way.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 4.23 e) i), all residential buildings shall be
set back a minimum 22.86 metres from the Lincoln Alexander
Parkway Right-of-Way, excluding access ramps.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 22-084, April 13, 2022)
(By-law No. 22-197, August 12, 2022)
f) Setback from Top of Bank of Lake Ontario Shoreline
A minimum setback of 7.5 metres from the top of bank, as determined by
the applicable Conservation Authority, shall apply for all buildings and
April 13, 2022 4-27
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
structures on a property abutting the Lake Ontario Shoreline.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.24 CONSERVATION AUTHORITY REGULATION AREA
Lands shown on Schedule “A” – zoning Maps as “CA Regulation Area” are
subject to additional regulation by the applicable Conservation Authority.
Landowners are advised to contact the appropriate Conservation Authority prior
to any development or site alteration within the area subject to the Conservation
Authority Regulation in order to determine approval requirement(s).
These boundaries are intended for information and reference purposes, and are
subject to change from time to time without requiring amendment to this By-law.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
4.25 DRIVE THROUGH REGULATIONS
a) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law, every drive through
shall provide the following minimum number of stacking spaces from the
service window:
i) Restaurant - 12 spaces
ii) All other uses - 3 spaces
b) No stacking spaces shall be less than 2.6 metres in width by 6.0 metres
in length, unless otherwise provided for in this By-law.
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
c) Locational specific regulations
i) No Drive-Through Facility shall be permitted to locate between any
required parking area and the main entrance for the use;
ii) No Drive-Through Facility stacking lane shall be permitted between
the street and the building, except where other buildings on the
same lot occupy the space between the Drive-Through Facility and
a street;
iii) Required stacking spaces shall not be permitted in any aisle
providing access to the required parking nor obstruct the ability to
access a parking space; and,
April 13, 2022 4-28
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
iv) No Drive-Through Facility, including the stacking space, and any
access driveway or manoeuvring space to provide access to the
Drive-Through Facility, shall be permitted less than 12.0 metres
from a Residential Zone measured from the property line of the lot
containing the Drive-Through Facility abutting a Residential Zone
or where the lots are separated by a public street, from the lot line
closest to the Residential Zone.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
d) Where a Landscaped Area occupies the space between a Drive-Through
Facility and a Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone property line:
i) A minimum 3.0 metre planting strip shall be provided and
maintained along that portion of the lot line that abuts a Residential
Zone or Institutional Zone property line or lot containing a
residential use; and,
ii) In addition to Section 4.19, a minimum 1.8 metre solid visual
barrier shall be provided and maintained along that portion of the
property line that abuts Residential Zone or Institutional Zone
property line or a lot containing a residential use.
(By-law No. 17-240, November 8, 2017)
4.26 URBAN FARM
(a) Every urban farm, as a principle use, shall comply with the following:
i) Notwithstanding the minimum lot area of any zone, the minimum
lot area shall be not less than 0.4 ha.
ii) Notwithstanding the size of the accessory structures of the
particular zone in which the farm produce/product stand is located,
only one farm produce/product stand shall be permitted and it shall
not exceed a maximum area of 18.5 metres squared.
iii) Notwithstanding the maximum building size of any zone, the
maximum gross floor area of all buildings and structures on the
site associated with the urban farm use shall not exceed 280
metres squared, and no single building shall exceed 140 metres
squared.
iv) Any building or structure associated with the urban farm use which
April 13, 2022 4-29
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
is greater than 35 metres squared shall be considered as a
principle building;
v) Notwithstanding the height requirement of any zone in which the
principle building is located, the maximum height of any building or
structure associated with the urban farm use shall not exceed 10.5
metres.
vi) Notwithstanding Section 4.8.1 f), any building or structure
associated with the urban farm use which is 35 metres squared or
less shall be considered as an accessory building or structure.
vii) Notwithstanding the setback requirements for a principle building
or accessory structure in any zone, a greenhouse shall have a
minimum 7.5 metre setback from any property line.
viii) All mechanical equipment shall be located within a building or
structure.
(b) Notwithstanding Section 4.26 a), an urban farm, as a principle use, may
locate on a lot less than 0.4 ha in size provided that:
i) there are no buildings or structures erected on the lot in which the
urban farm is located.
ii) Notwithstanding the definition of urban farm, no retail sales shall
be permitted on-site.
(c) Every urban farm that locates on the same lot as another principle use,
shall comply with the following:
i) All mechanical equipment shall be located within a building or
structure.
ii) All buildings and structures shall comply with the accessory
structure regulations of the zone in which the use is located.
iii) Notwithstanding, Section 4.8.1, where an urban farm is located on
a roof top, the height of the accessory structure shall not exceed
the maximum building height.
April 13, 2022 4-30
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
iv) Notwithstanding the definition of urban farm, no retail sales shall
be permitted on-site.
(d) Notwithstanding permitted uses in any Residential, Commercial and Mixed
Use or Institutional zone, an urban farm shall only be permitted in the rear
yard or on the roof top for the following properties:
Street From To
i) Wilson Street Dalley Drive Rousseaux
Street
ii) Dundas Street York Road Market Street
(Dundas)
iii) Mill Street Church Street Highway 5
iv) Binbrook Road Highway 56 2553
Binbrook
Road
King Street West Longwood Road Sterling
Street
ii) James Street North CN Railway Tracks Cannon
street
iii) James Street South Hunter Street East Markland
Avenue
iv) Locke Street Main Street West Herkimer
Street
iv) Kenilworth Avenue Barton Street Main Street
North East
v) Ottawa Street North Barton Street Main Street
East
vi) Barton Street East Sherman Avenue Wellington
North Street North
vii) Concession Street East 33rd Street East 15th
Street
(By-law No. 14-273, September 24, 2014)
4.27 COMMUNITY GARDEN
(a) All buildings and structures shall comply with the accessory structure
regulations of the zone in which it is located.
April 13, 2022 4-31
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
(b) Notwithstanding Section 4.8.1, where a community garden is located on a
roof top, the height of the accessory structure shall not exceed the
maximum building height.
(c) Notwithstanding permitted uses in any Residential, Commercial and Mixed
Use or Institutional zone and in addition to the provisions of Section 4.27
(b), a community garden shall only be located in the rear yard or on a roof
top of a principle building in the following areas:
Street From To
i) King Street West Longwood Road Sterling
Street
ii) James Street North CN Railway Tracks Cannon
street
iii) James Street South Hunter Street East Markland
Avenue
iv) Locke Street Main Street West Herkimer
Street
iv) Kenilworth Avenue Barton Street Main Street
North East
v) Ottawa Street North Barton Street Main Street
East
vi) Barton Street East Sherman Avenue Wellington
North Street North
vii) Concession Street East 33rd Street East 15th
Street
(By-law No. 14-273, September 24, 2014)
4.28 URBAN FARMERS MARKET
(a) No person shall conduct an urban farmers market except as permitted
herein and in accordance with the requirements of subsection 4.28:
(i) An urban farmers market may be permitted in the D1 and D2 Zones
in accordance with the requirements of Section 4.28;
(ii) Notwithstanding the definition of accessory, an urban farmers
market may be permitted on the same lot as the following existing
uses in the Downtown, (D5) and (D6), Institutional (I1), (I2) and (I3),
Community Park (P2) and City Wide Park (P3), Transit Oriented
Corridor (TOC1), (TOC2) and (TOC4) and Commercial and Mixed
April 13, 2022 4-32
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Use (C3), (C4), (C5), (C5a), and (C6) Zones:
1. Arena;
2. Commercial Recreation;
3. Community Centre;
4. Day Nursery;
5. Educational Establishment;
6. Long Term Care Facility;
7. Hospital;
8. Commercial Parking;
9. Place of Worship;
10. Stadium; and,
11. Swimming Pool.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
(iii) the majority of the local agricultural products or local value added
agricultural products sold from vendor stalls shall be grown or
produced by the person who operates the vendor stalls;
(iv) 75% of vendors shall sell local agricultural products, value-added
local agricultural products or VQA wines;
(v) 25% of the vendors may include entertainment, food premises/
demonstrations, baked goods, but shall not include the sale of
personal services or second hand goods;
(vi) the sale of VQA wines shall only be permitted in accordance with
provincial regulations governing the sale of wine;
(vii) include a minimum of 5 vendor stalls and a maximum of 50 vendor
stalls;
(viii) operates a maximum of 2 days each week; and,
(ix) may occupy the required parking spaces and be located within the
required yards of the principle use.
(By-law No. 15-107, April 22, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-114, May 9, 2018)
April 13, 2022 4-33
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.29 MINIMUM DISTANCE SEPARATION FORMULAE
a) That all development within the City of Hamilton be subject to the
Minimum Distance Separation (MDS) formulae as established by the
Province, as amended from time to time.
b) Notwithstanding a) above, where a new dwelling is proposed to be
constructed on an existing lot less than 4.0 hectares in size, MDS I shall
not be applied.
c) Notwithstanding a) above, where a new building other than buildings
associated with agriculture are proposed to be constructed on an existing
lot, MDS I shall not be applied.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
4.30 ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT STATEMENT (EIS)
An EIS may be required where development is proposed in or adjacent to an
environmental feature in order to ensure that the environmental feature is
appropriately protected against the impacts of development. Accordingly, an
EIS may be required for development proposed on lands zoned P6, P7 and P8
as well as development proposed within 120 metres of natural features.”
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
4.31 NIAGARA ESCARPMENT PLAN DEVELOPMENT CONTROL AREA
Pursuant to Ontario Regulations 828/90, as amended from time to time, when
lands are located within the Development Control Area defined under Ontario
Regulation 826/90, as amended from time to time, and identified as “Niagara
Escarpment Commission Development Control Area” on Schedule “A” – Zoning
Maps, zoning shall have no effect and is provided for information purposes only.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
4.32 REDUCTION IN REGULATIONS RESULTING FROM PUBLIC TRANSIT
FACILITIES
No lot shall be deemed to be in contravention of any provisions(s) of this By-law
by reason only of the fact that a part or parts of any lot has or have been
conveyed to, or acquired, leased, or subject to an easement by the City of
Hamilton or Province of Ontario for the placement of public transit facilities.
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
April 13, 2022 4-34
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
4.33 ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT AND ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT -
DETACHED
a) All the regulations of this By-law applicable to the principal dwelling shall
continue to apply unless specifically provided in Section 4.33.
b) A Single Detached Dwelling, Duplex Dwelling, or Triplex Dwelling built in
conformity with this By-law, may be converted to contain a fourth
Additional Dwelling Unit.
c) Notwithstanding any applicable regulations of this By-law, no more than
four Dwelling Units shall be permitted on a lot that contains an Additional
Dwelling Unit and/or Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.33.1 ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT
a) Additional Dwelling Units shall be permitted in accordance with the
following:
i) A Single Detached Dwelling shall be permitted to contain up to two
Additional Dwelling Units.
ii) A Duplex Dwelling shall be permitted to contain one Additional
Dwelling Unit.
iii) Each semi-detached dwelling unit of a Semi-Detached Dwelling shall
be permitted to contain one Additional Dwelling Unit.
iv) A Street Townhouse Dwelling shall be permitted to contain one
Additional Dwelling Unit.
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.33.2 ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT – DETACHED
a) A maximum of one Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be permitted
on a lot containing a Single Detached Dwelling, Duplex Dwelling, Semi-
Detached Dwelling, Street Townhouse Dwelling, or a Triplex Dwelling.
b) In addition to Section 4.33.2 (a), a legally established accessory building
existing as of May 12, 2021, may be converted to the one Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached, subject to the following provision:
April 13, 2022 4-35
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
i) Any additions over 10% of the existing gross floor area of the legally
established accessory building converted to an Additional Dwelling
Unit – Detached shall be in accordance with the regulations of Section
4.33.2.
c) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall only be permitted in a Rear
and/or interior Side Yard.
d) A minimum 1.2 metre setback shall be provided from the interior Side Lot
Line and Rear Lot Line.
i) Notwithstanding Section 4.33.2 d), an eave or a gutter may extend a
maximum of 0.45 metres into a required minimum setback area.
ii) In addition to Section 4.33.2 d), a landscape strip is required to be
provided within the required side yard adjacent to an Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached and shall be limited to sod, ground cover,
permeable pavers, or a planting strip, and may include a visual
barrier.
e) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall not be located closer to the
flankage street than the principal dwelling.
f) An unobstructed path with a minimum 1.0 metre width and minimum 2.1
metre clearance in height from a street line to the entrance of the
Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be provided and maintained.
g) The following building separation shall be provided:
i) Where an Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached is in the Rear Yard, a
minimum distance of 7.5 metres shall be required between the rear
wall of the principal dwelling and the Additional Dwelling Unit –
Detached.
ii) Where an Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached is in an Interior Side
Yard, the following is required:
(A) A minimum distance of 4.0 metres shall be provided between
the side wall of the principal dwelling and an Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached; and,
(B) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be set back a
minimum 5.0 metres from the front façade of the principal
April 13, 2022 4-36
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
dwelling.
h) A maximum height of 6.0 metres shall be permitted.
i) Notwithstanding Section 4.33.2 h), balconies and rooftop patios
shall be prohibited above the first floor level.
i) The maximum gross floor area shall not exceed the lesser of 75 square
metres or the gross floor area of the principal dwelling.
i) Notwithstanding Section 4.33.2 i), the maximum combined lot
coverage of all accessory buildings and the Additional Dwelling Unit
- Detached shall be 25%.
ii) In addition to Section 4.33.2 i), the ground floor area of a Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached shall not exceed 70% of the ground floor
area of the principal dwelling when the ground floor area of the
principal dwelling is less than or equal to 105 square metres.
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
(By-law No. 22-197, August 12, 2022)
(Zoning By-law No. 23-079, May 10, 2023)
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.33.3 ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNITS IN AGRICULTURE (A1), RURAL (A2) AND
SETTLEMENT RESIDENTIAL (S1) ZONES
a) An Additional Dwelling Unit shall only be permitted on lands within a
Agriculture (A1), Rural (A2) or Settlement Residential (S1) Zone and shall
only be permitted on a lot that is greater than 0.6 ha in size.
b) Notwithstanding 4.33.3 a), an Additional Dwelling Unit shall not be
permitted on lands identified in Special Figures 24.1 to 24.5.
c) The waste disposal and water supply systems shall be in accordance with
Section 4.22 iii).
(By-law No. 21-071, May 12, 2021)
(By-law No. 22-132, June 08, 2022)
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.33.4 ADDITIONAL DWELLING UNIT – DETACHED IN AGRICULTURAL (A1),
RURAL (A2) AND SETTLEMENT RESIDENTIAL (S1) ZONES
a) For lands within an A1, A2, S1 Zone, a maximum of one Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be permitted on a lot containing a Single
April 13, 2022 4-37
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
Detached Dwelling having a minimum lot area of 1.5 hectares.
i) Notwithstanding 4.33.4 a) above, an Additional Dwelling Unit –
Detached shall not be permitted on lands identified in Figures 24.1 to
24.5 of Schedule “F” – Special Figures.
b) In addition to Section 4.33.4 a), a legally established accessory building
existing as of May 12, 2021, may be converted to the one Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached permitted on a lot containing an existing Single
Detached Dwelling subject to the following provision:
i) Any additions over 10% of the existing gross floor area of the legally
established accessory building converted to an Additional Dwelling
Unit – Detached shall be in accordance with the regulations of
Section 4.33.4.
c) All the regulations of the By-law applicable to the existing dwelling shall
continue to apply unless specifically provided in Section 4.33.4.
d) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall only be permitted in a Rear
and/or interior Side Yard.
e) A minimum 1.2 metre setback shall be provided from the interior Side Lot
Line and Rear Lot Line
i) Notwithstanding Section 4.33.4 e), an eave or a gutter may extend a
maximum of 0.45 metres into a required minimum setback area.
ii) In addition to Section 4.33.4 e), a landscaped strip is required to be
provided within the required side yard adjacent to an Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached and shall be limited to sod, ground cover,
permeable pavers, or a planting strip, and may include a visual
barrier.
f) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall not be located closer to the
flankage street than the principal dwelling.
g) An unobstructed path with a minimum 1.0 metre width and minimum 2.1
metre clearance in height from a street line to the entrance of the
Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be provided and maintained.
April 13, 2022 4-38
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
h) The following building separation shall be provided:
i) Where an Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached is in the Rear Yard, a
minimum distance of 7.5 metres shall be required between the rear
wall of the principal dwelling and the Additional Dwelling Unit –
Detached.
ii) Where an Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached is in an Interior Side
Yard, the following is required:
A) A minimum distance of 4.0 metres shall be provided between
the side wall of the principal dwelling and an Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached; and,
B) An Additional Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be set back a
minimum 5.0 metres from the front façade of the principal
dwelling.
i) A maximum height of 6.0 metres shall be permitted.
i) Notwithstanding Section 4.33.4 i), balconies and rooftop patios shall
be prohibited above the first floor level.
j) The maximum gross floor area shall not exceed the principal dwelling.
k) Notwithstanding 4.33.4 g) above, the maximum combined lot coverage of
all accessory buildings, Farm Labour Residence(s) and the Additional
Dwelling Unit – Detached shall be 25%.
l) The waste disposal and water supply systems shall be in accordance with
Section 4.22 iii).
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27, 2024, not final & binding)
4.34 Intentionally left blank
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
4.35 LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS
On lots containing a single detached dwelling, semi-detached dwelling, duplex
dwelling, triplex dwelling, fourplex dwelling, or street townhouse dwelling in all
zones, the following shall be provided:
April 13, 2022 4-39
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS
ZONING BY-LAW
a) A minimum 50% landscaped area in the Front Yard;
b) A minimum 50% landscaped area in the Flankage Yard; and,
c) A single area within the required landscaped area for tree protection and/or
tree planting, subject to the following:
i) each side shall be a minimum 3.75 metres in length; and,
ii) shall not contain hard landscaping or structures.
d) On a lot containing a fourplex dwelling, when parking spaces are located in
the rear yard, the following shall be provided:
i) A minimum 1.5 metre wide landscaped strip shall be provided
between the parking spaces and/or aisle, and the side lot line, and
shall contain a wall or fence in accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.19; and,
ii) A minimum 3 metre wide landscaped strip shall be provided
between the parking spaces and/or aisle, and the rear lot line, and
shall contain a Visual Barrier in accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.19.
(By-law No. 22-197, August 12, 2022)
(By-law No. 24-051, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
April 13, 2022 4-40



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 5 parking regulationspdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Where this By-law requires the provision of parking facilities, no lands shall be used and
no building shall be used or erected in any zone unless there are provided and maintained
facilities for parking in accordance with the following regulations and Parking Schedules,
unless otherwise specifically provided for in this By-law.
5.1 PARKING SUPPLY REQUIREMENTS AND RESTRICTIONS
5.1.1 MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF PARKING SPACES
a) Minimum Number of Required Parking Spaces
The minimum number of required parking spaces which must be provided
shall be the result of applying:
i) The minimum amount in accordance with the Minimum Required
Parking Rate Schedule in Section 5.7.1;
ii) Any eligible exception in this Section; and,
iii) Any eligible deductions in this Section.
b) Exception for Existing Buildings in All Zones
Notwithstanding Section 5.7.1, for any use located in all or part of a building
existing on the effective date of this By-law, no parking spaces are required,
provided that the number of parking spaces which existed on the effective
date of this By-law shall continue to be provided, except that:
i) a use shall not be required to provide additional parking beyond that
which is required by Section 5.7.1; and,
ii) where an addition, alteration or expansion of an existing building is
proposed, the parking requirements of Section 5.7.1 shall only apply
to the increased gross floor area of the building.
c) Rounding Calculations
i) Where the application of the parking standards in Section 5.7.1, 5.7.2,
5.7.4, and 5.7.5 results in a numeric fraction, fractions shall be
rounded down to the nearest whole number.
ii) Where the application of the minimum accessible parking standards in
Section 5.7.3 results in a numeric fraction, fractions shall be rounded
up to the nearest whole number.
iii) Where the calculations in Sections 5.7.1, 5.7.2, 5.7.3, 5.7.4 or 5.7.5
April 10, 2024 5-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
apply to multiple uses, rounding shall only be applied to the sum of
the requirements for all uses on the lot.
d) Required Parking to be Provided on Same Lot
All required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as the use for
which they are required, unless the parking spaces are provided on another
lot in compliance with Section 5.6.1.
e) Provision of Parking on a Lot Subject to Multiple Zones
Where more than one zone applies to a lot, parking spaces provided for any
use on the lot may be located within any zone within the boundaries of the
lot, except:
i) where a portion of a lot is within one of the Open Space and Park
Zones, no parking spaces may be located within such portion of the
lot except parking spaces required for a permitted use located within
such portion.
5.1.2 MAXIMUM PERMITTED NUMBER OF PARKING
a) Maximum Permitted Number of Parking Spaces
Where Section 5.7.2 specifies a maximum permitted number of parking
spaces, the number of parking spaces located on a lot shall not exceed that
number.
b) Reduction of Excess Parking Spaces
Where the number of existing parking spaces exceeds the maximum
permitted in accordance with Section 5.7.2, the parking spaces provided in
excess of the maximum parking standard may be eliminated. However, in
no case may the number of parking spaces provided be less than the
minimum parking requirements in Section 5.7.1.
5.1.3 MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACES
a) Minimum Number of Accessible Parking Spaces
Accessible parking shall be designated and provided in accordance with the
requirements of the Minimum Accessible Parking Rate Schedule in Section
5.7.3.
April 10, 2024 5-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
b) Exception for Certain Residential Uses
Section 5.7.3 shall not apply to Single Detached Dwellings, Semi-Detached
Dwellings, Duplex Dwellings, Triplex Dwellings, Fourplex Dwellings and
Street Townhouse Dwellings.
5.1.4 MINIMUM REQUIRED NUMBER OF ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACES
a) Minimum Required Number of Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces
Where parking spaces are provided, Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces shall
be provided in accordance with:
i) The minimum rates in accordance with the Parking Schedule in
Section 5.7.4; and,
ii) Any eligible exception in this Section.
b) Exception for the Agriculture (A1) Zone, Rural (A2) Zone, and any Open
Space and Park Zone
The minimum requirement for Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces shall not
apply to any parking space located within one of the following Zones:
i) Agriculture (A1) Zone;
ii) Rural (A2) Zone; and,
iii) Any Open Space and Park Zone.
c) Exception for Existing Buildings in All Zones
Notwithstanding Section 5.7.4, for any use within any Zone, located in all or
part of a building existing on the effective date of this By-law, no Electric
Vehicle Parking Spaces are required, except that:
i) where an addition or expansion of an existing building is proposed,
the Electric Vehicle Parking requirements of Section 5.7.4 shall only
apply to such addition or expansion.
d) Exception for Existing Parking Lots in All Zones
Notwithstanding Section 5.7.4, for any Parking Lot or portion thereof within
any Zone, existing on the effective date of this By-law, no Electric Vehicle
Parking Spaces are required, except that:
i) where an expansion or enlargement of such parking is proposed, the
April 10, 2024 5-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
electric vehicle parking requirements of Section 5.7.4 shall only apply
to such expansion or enlargement.
e) Regulations for Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces
Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces shall be subject to the regulations in Section
5.6.7.
5.2 FUNCTIONAL DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
5.2.1 MINIMUM PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS
a) Minimum Parking Space Dimensions
Unless permitted by another regulation in this By-law, parking space sizes
shall be a minimum of 2.8 metres in width and 5.8 metres in length.
b) Required Increase in Width due to Obstruction
Where a wall, column, or any other obstruction is located abutting or within
any parking space, the minimum width of a parking space shall be increased
by 0.3 metres for each side which is obstructed by a wall, column, or other
obstruction;
c) Exceptions to Increase in Width due to Obstruction
Notwithstanding Subsection 5.2.1 b), an additional 0.3 metres shall not be
required provided all of the following conditions are met:
i) the maximum length of the wall, column or other obstruction shall not
exceed 1.15 metres, measured along the side of the parking space,
from the front or rear of the space towards the side’s midpoint;
ii) the wall, column or other obstruction is located at the front, rear, or
both ends of the parking space; and,
iii) the wall, column or other obstruction does not project more than 0.15
metres into the width of the parking space.
d) Increase in Length Due to Stairs within an Attached Garage
The length of each parking space in an attached garage of a dwelling unit
shall be increased by an equivalent length of the step, steps or stairwell that
extends into the parking space, except:
April 10, 2024 5-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
i) an open stairway may project into the length of the required parking
space not more than 0.75 metres provided the height of the stairway
does not exceed 0.5 metres.
e) Light Standards Not Considered Obstructions
Notwithstanding Section 5.2.1 b), light standards, including the base, located
at the intersection of four parking spaces shall not be considered as an
obstruction.
f) Optional Reduction in Minimum Dimensions for Small Car Parking
Notwithstanding Subsection 5.2.1 a), where 10 or more parking spaces are
provided on a lot, the minimum parking space size of not more than 10% of
such required parking spaces may be a width of 2.6 metres and a length of
5.5 metres, provided that any such parking space is clearly identified as
being reserved for the parking of small cars only.
g) Minimum Parallel Parking Space Dimensions
Notwithstanding Subsection 5.2.1 a), each parallel parking space shall have
a minimum width of 2.4 metres and a minimum length of 6.7 metres, except
that end spaces which have a clear, unobstructed approach, may have a
minimum length of 5.5 metres.
5.2.2 MINIMUM ACCESSIBLE PARKING SPACE DIMENSIONS AND MINIMUM
ACCESSIBILITY AISLE REQUIREMENTS
a) Minimum Accessible Parking Space Width and Accessibility Aisle
Requirement
Each accessible parking space shall have:
i) a minimum width of 3.4 metres, notwithstanding Section 5.2.1 a)
above and subject to Section 5.2.2 b) below;
ii) a minimum length of 5.8 metres; and,
iii) a minimum of one side must continuously abut an accessibility aisle,
provided in accordance with Section 5.2.2 c) and d) below.
b) Permitted Reduction in Width for Accessible Parking Spaces
Where two or more accessible parking spaces are provided, a maximum of
50% of such spaces, rounded up to the nearest whole number in the case of
April 10, 2024 5-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
a numeric fraction, may have a reduced minimum width of 2.4 metres.
c) Accessibility Aisle Requirements
A minimum of one side of each accessible parking space shall continuously
abut an unobstructed accessibility aisle which shall:
i) have a minimum width of 1.5 metres;
ii) have a minimum length which extends the full length of each abutting
accessible parking space; and,
iii) be clearly identified and marked.
d) Sharing of Accessibility Aisle
A maximum of two accessible parking spaces may abut one accessibility
aisle, provided such spaces continuously abut opposite sides of the shared
accessibility aisle.
5.2.3 DRIVE AISLE REQUIREMENTS
a) Minimum Drive Aisle Width
The drive aisle abutting any parking space shall be designed and provided in
accordance with the following minimum width requirements.
Parking Angle Degree One-Way and Two-Way Aisle
Width
0º 3.7 m
15º 3.7 m
30º 3.7 m
45º 4.5 m
60º 5.5 m
75º 6.0 m
90º 6.0 m
April 10, 2024 5-6
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
5.2.4 ACCESS REQUIREMENTS
a) Access Design Requirements
Access to all parking shall:
i) be arranged so as to not interfere with normal public use of the street
or laneway;
ii) be provided by means of an access driveway:
1. located on the lot; or,
2. located partly on the lot in the case of a mutual driveway; or,
3. by means of a Right-of-Way; and,
iii) in the case of a Parking Lot, provide ingress and egress of vehicles to
and from a street in a forward motion only.
b) Minimum Access Driveway Width
The width of any driveway providing access to a parking space shall be a
minimum of 2.7 metres.
c) Tandem and Stacked Parking Restriction and Exceptions
All parking spaces shall have adequate means of ingress and egress to and
from the street or laneway without the necessity of moving any other motor
vehicle, except:
i) the accessibility to a maximum of one of the parking spaces for a
Single Detached Dwelling may be obstructed by another motor
vehicle; and,
ii) where a parking attendant is on site or a valet service is provided in
association with a Commercial Parking Facility or Hotel, parking
spaces may be designed to include the use of tandem or stacked
parking.
d) Minimum Floor Level for an Attached Garage
Where an attached garage is provided for a Single Detached Dwelling,
April 10, 2024 5-7
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Semi-Detached Dwelling, Duplex Dwelling, Street Townhouse Dwelling,
Triplex Dwelling or Fourplex Dwelling in any Zone except the Agriculture
(A1) and Rural (A2) Zone, the finished floor level of the garage shall be a
minimum of 0.3 metres above grade.
5.3 LOCATIONAL, LANDSCAPING AND SURFACE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
5.3.1 LOCATIONAL AND LANDSCAPING REQUIREMENTS FOR ALL USES
a) Streetline Setback and Planting Strip Requirement
Unless identified as exempt in Section 5.3.1 b), parking spaces and
associated drive aisles, excluding driveways extending directly from the
street, shall be subject to all of the following:
i) Shall not be located within 3.0 metres of a street line;
ii) Shall provide a 3.0 metre wide Planting Strip being required and
permanently maintained between the street line and the parking
spaces or aisle, except for that portion of a lot line;
1. Notwithstanding 5.3.1 a) iii), no Planting Strip shall be required for
any portion of a lot line abutting the Red Hill Valley Parkway or the
Lincoln Alexander Parkway; and,
iii) Where a Planting Strip is provided, as per 5.3.1 a) ii) above, any
architectural wall or feature within the Planting Strip shall be limited to
a maximum height of 0.6 metres.
b) Exemption for Certain Uses
The setback and Planting Strip requirements of Section 5.3.1 a) shall not
apply to parking provided in association with the following uses:
i) Single Detached Dwelling;
ii) Semi-Detached Dwelling;
iii) Street Townhouse Dwelling;
iv) Duplex Dwelling;
v) Triplex Dwelling; and
vi) Fourplex Dwelling.
c) Multiple Dwelling Front and Flankage Yard Parking Restriction
In addition to Section 5.3.1 a), on a lot containing a Multiple Dwelling:
April 10, 2024 5-8
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
i) With the exception of any visitor parking required by Section 5.7.1,
required parking for Multiple Dwellings shall not be located between
the façade and the front lot line or between the façade and flankage
lot line. In no case shall any parking be located within the required
front yard or required flankage yard or within 3.0 metres of a street
line.
ii) Visitor parking may be permitted between the façade and a street
provided that no more than 50% of the front or flankage yard shall be
used for visitor parking and access to such parking.
d) Landscape Strip and Visual Barrier Requirement for Parking Lots
Where a Parking Lot is situated on a lot which abuts a Residential Zone,
Settlement Residential (S1) Zone, Downtown (D5), or Downtown (D6) Zone,
the following shall be provided and maintained along that portion of the lot
line that abuts a Residential Zone, Settlement Residential (S1) Zone,
Downtown (D5) Zone, or Downtown (D6) Zone:
i) A minimum 1.5 metre wide landscape strip which shall contain a
Visual Barrier in accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-law.
e) Landscaped Area and Landscaped Parking Island Requirements for Surface
Parking Lots Containing 50 or More Parking Spaces in All Zones
In addition to Section 5.3.1 b), the following requirements shall apply to
surface Parking Lots in all zones which contain 50 or more parking spaces:
i) Landscaped Area(s) and Landscaped Parking Island(s) with a
minimum combined area of 10% of the area of the Parking Lot and
associated access driveway and manoeuvring areas shall be provided
and maintained;
ii) Each Landscaped Area and Landscaped Parking Island shall have a
minimum area of 10.0 square metres;
iii) The calculation for Landscaped Area(s) and Landscaped Parking
Island(s) shall not include the area of landscaping provided to satisfy
the minimum requirement of any other Section of this By-law;
iv) A Landscaped Area or Landscaped Parking Island may be traversed
by a pedestrian walkway; and,
April 10, 2024 5-9
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
v) When calculating the minimum number of parking spaces in
accordance with Section 5.7.1, such number may be reduced by the
number needed to accommodate the minimum Landscaped Parking
Island requirement of this section, up to a maximum of 10% of the
required parking spaces.
5.3.2 LOCATIONAL, LANDSCAPING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS FOR
SINGLE DETACHED DWELLINGS, SEMI-DETACHED DWELLINGS, DUPLEX
DWELLINGS, TRIPLEX DWELLINGS AND FOURPLEX DWELLINGS IN ALL
ZONES EXCEPT THE AGRICULTURE (A1) AND RURAL (A2) ZONES
a) On a lot containing a Single Detached Dwelling, Semi-Detached Dwelling,
Duplex Dwelling, Triplex Dwelling or Fourplex Dwelling, in all Zones except
the Agriculture (A1) and Rural (A2) Zone:
i) The width of a driveway shall not exceed the width of an attached
garage;
ii) Notwithstanding Subsection 5.3.2 a) i), on a lot having an attached
garage less than 5.0 metres in width, the driveway may extend
beyond the width of the garage toward the side lot line to a maximum
width of 5.0 metres and no closer than 0.6 metres to the side lot line,
nearest to the garage;
iii) In the case of a dwelling unit without an attached garage, the
driveway width shall not exceed 50% of the lot width or 8.0 metres,
whichever is less;
iv) A maximum of one driveway shall be permitted for each dwelling unit,
except in the case of:
1. A corner lot where a maximum of one driveway may be permitted
from each street.
2. On a lot having a minimum width of 30.0 metres, a maximum of
two driveways may be permitted.
v) On a corner lot, no access driveway shall be permitted through a
daylight triangle.
5.3.3 LOCATIONAL, LANDSCAPING AND DRIVEWAY REQUIREMENTS FOR
STREET TOWNHOUSE DWELLINGS
April 10, 2024 5-10
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
a) On a lot containing a Street Townhouse Dwelling:
i) The required parking spaces for such dwelling shall be located a
minimum distance of 5.8 metres from the street line to which the
driveway is accessed; and,
ii) No parking shall be permitted in a required front yard or required
flankage yard.
5.3.4 PARKING FACILITY SURFACE MATERIAL REQUIREMENTS
a) Parking Spaces, Driveways and Widening(s) in All Zones
Parking spaces, driveways and widening(s) in all zones shall be provided
and maintained with stable surfaces such as asphalt, concrete or other hard-
surfaced material, crushed stone, permeable pavers or gravel, and shall be
maintained in a dust free condition.
i) Notwithstanding Section 5.3.4 a), on a lot containing a residential use
in a Residential Zone, any parking provided beyond that which is
required by Section 5.7.1 of this By-law shall be maintained with
permeable material and shall not be deemed landscaped area in the
calculation of total landscaped area on a lot.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 5.3.4 a), in the Industrial Zones, where
crushed stone or gravel is provided, the access driveway shall be
designed such that a minimum of 10.0 metres extending from the
streetline shall be constructed and maintained with asphalt, concrete
or other hard surfaced material, and shall be maintained in a dust free
condition.
b) Parking Lots in All Zones, except the Rural Zones
Parking Lots in all zones, except the Rural Zones, shall be designed and
maintained with stable surfaces such as asphalt, concrete, or other hard-
surfaced material, or permeable pavers.
c) Parking Lots in the Rural Zones
Parking lots in the Rural Zones shall be designed and maintained with stable
surfaces such as asphalt, concrete or other hard-surfaced material, crushed
stone, permeable pavers, or gravel, except that:
April 10, 2024 5-11
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
i) Where crushed stone or gravel is provided, the access driveway shall
be designed such that a minimum of 10.0 metres extending from the
streetline shall be constructed and maintained with asphalt, concrete
or other hard surfaced material, and shall be maintained in a dust free
condition.
5.4 BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
5.4.1 MINIMUM BICYCLE PARKING REQUIREMENTS
a) Minimum Number of Required Bicycle Parking Spaces
The minimum required number of short-term and long-term bicycle parking
spaces which must be provided for each building on a lot in accordance with
Section 5.4.2 shall be the result of applying:
i) The minimum amount in accordance with the Minimum Bicycle
Parking Schedule in Section 5.7.5; and,
ii) Any eligible exception in this Section.
b) Exception for Existing Buildings
Notwithstanding Section 5.7.5, for any use located in all or part of a building
existing on the effective date of this By-law, no additional bicycle parking
spaces are required, provided that the number of bicycle parking spaces
which existed on the effective date of this By-law shall continue to be
provided and maintained, except that:
i) a use shall not be required to provide additional bicycle parking
beyond that which is required by Section 5.7.5; and,
ii) where an addition, alteration or expansion of an existing building is
proposed, the bicycle parking requirements of Section 5.7.5 shall only
apply to the increased gross floor area of the building.
5.4.2 BICYCLE PARKING REGULATIONS
a) Bicycle Parking Locational Requirements
i) Short-term Bicycle Parking Spaces shall be publicly accessible and
located within a bicycle parking area at grade, which includes the
first floor of a building or an exterior surface area.
April 10, 2024 5-12
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
ii) Long-term Bicycle Parking Spaces shall be located in a secure
enclosed bicycle parking area.
5.5 LOADING FACILITIES
5.5.1 LOADING FACILITY REGULATIONS
a) The location of loading doors and associated loading facilities shall be
subject to the following:
i) Shall not be permitted within a Front Yard;
ii) Shall not be permitted in any yard abutting a street, except where
screened from view by a Visual Barrier in accordance with Section
4.19 of this By-law; and,
iii) Shall not be permitted in a required yard abutting a Residential Zone
or an Institutional Zone and shall be screened from view by a Visual
Barrier in accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-law.
5.6 GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
5.6.1 REQUIREMENTS FOR LOCATING REQUIRED PARKING ON ANOTHER LOT
a) Notwithstanding Subsection 5.1.1 d), where the provision of parking on the
same lot as the use requiring the parking is not possible, such off-site
parking may be located on another lot within 300.0 metres of the lot
containing the use requiring the parking, provided:
i) Such off-site parking shall only be permitted within a zone in which
the use requiring such parking is permitted or a U3 Zone;
ii) Such off-site parking shall be subject to Subsection 5.6.1 b); and,
iii) Notwithstanding Subsection 5.6.1 a), off-site parking shall only be
permitted on a lot in a Residential Zone where the off-site parking is
for a use in a Residential Zone.
b) Where the required parking is provided in accordance with 5.6.1 a) above,
the owners of both lots shall enter into an agreement with the City to be
registered against the title of both the lot upon which parking is to be
provided and the lot containing the use requiring the parking. The lot upon
which the parking is located, pursuant to the agreement, shall continue to be
April 10, 2024 5-13
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
so used only for such purposes until alternate parking spaces in conformity
with the regulations of this By-law are provided.
c) Parking as provided for in 5.6.1 b) may be transferred to another lot in
accordance with Subsection 5.6.1 a), provided that an agreement as per
5.6.1 b) is registered on title of said other lot.
5.6.2 COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLES
a) In any Residential Zone, Downtown (D5) Zone, Downtown (D6) Zone,
Settlement Residential (S1) Zone, or any Residential uses in any Institutional
Zone:
i) A maximum of one Commercial Motor Vehicle may be parked on a lot.
ii) Commercial Motor Vehicles shall be stored or parked within a garage
or fully enclosed building.
iii) Notwithstanding Subsection 5.6.2 a) ii), a Commercial Motor Vehicle
may be parked on a driveway, provided the vehicle:
1. shall not exceed a gross weight of 3,000 kilograms registered
with the Province;
2. shall not exceed a maximum vehicle length of 6.0 metres;
3. shall not exceed a maximum vehicle height of 2.4 metres; and,
4. shall not occupy the required parking spaces for existing
dwellings on the lot.
iv) Subsections 5.6.2 a) i), ii), and iii) shall not apply to any Commercial
Motor Vehicle attending a residential lot for the purpose of short-term
delivery or service.
b) In any Agricultural (A1) Zone or Rural (A2) Zone:
i) A maximum of one Commercial Motor Vehicle may be parked
unenclosed, provided it is setback a minimum of 20 metres from any
lot line and 50 metres from a dwelling on an adjacent lot.
ii) Notwithstanding the definition of Commercial Motor Vehicle,
Section 5.6.2 b) i) above does not apply to the storage or parking
of agricultural vehicles and equipment associated with an
April 10, 2024 5-14
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
agricultural operation.
5.6.3 TRAILERS
a) Storage of one trailer in any Residential Zone, Downtown D5 Zone,
Downtown D6 Zone, residential uses in any Institutional Zone or Settlement
Residential S1 Zone, shall be permitted provided that the trailer:
i) shall be stored within a garage or fully enclosed building; or,
ii) on a driveway, provided the trailer:
1. remains attached to a motor vehicle;
2. shall not exceed a maximum combined vehicle length of 6.0
metres;
3. shall not exceed a maximum height of 2.4 metres;
4. shall not exceed a maximum width of 2.5 metres; and,
5. shall not occupy the required parking spaces for existing
dwellings on the lot.
iii) Notwithstanding Subsection i) and ii) above, any motor vehicle with a
trailer may attend residential properties for the purpose of delivery or
service only.
b) In any Agricultural A1 Zone or Rural A2 Zone,
i) A maximum of one trailer may be stored unenclosed, provided it is
setback a minimum of 20 metres from any lot line and 50 metres from
a dwelling on an adjacent lot.
ii) Notwithstanding the definition of Trailer, Section i) above does not
apply to the storage or parking of agricultural equipment associated
with an agricultural operation.
5.6.4 MAJOR RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT
a) In any Residential Zone, Downtown (D5) or Downtown (D6) Zone or
Settlement Residential (S1) Zone, Major Recreational Equipment:
April 10, 2024 5-15
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
i) May be stored in a garage;
ii) Shall not be stored in the front yard or flankage yard;
iii) May be stored in a rear yard provided that it is screened from the view
of a street and abutting properties zoned Residential or Downtown
(D5) or Downtown (D6) with a Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this By-law;
iv) May be stored in a carport or side yard provided that the Major
Recreational Equipment is screened with a Visual Barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-law, and has a minimum
setback of 1.2 metres from the side lot line; and,
v) Notwithstanding 5.6.4 a) ii), iii), and iv), Major Recreational Equipment
may be parked on a driveway wholly inside the lot line between May
1st and October 31st in each year.
b) In any Rural Zone, Major Recreational Equipment:
i) May be stored enclosed;
ii) Shall not be stored in the minimum required front yard or flankage
yard;
iii) May be stored in a rear yard or side yard provided that the Major
Recreational Equipment is screened with a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-law, and has a minimum
setback of 1.2 metres from the side or rear lot line;
iv) Notwithstanding Subsections i), ii) and iii) herein, Major Recreational
Equipment may be parked on a driveway wholly inside the lot line
between May 1st and October 31st in each year; and,
v) Storage of Major Recreational Equipment shall only be permitted for
Major Recreational Equipment owned by a resident of the lot.
5.6.5 PROHIBITION OF NEW PRINCIPAL SURFACE PARKING LOTS IN
DOWNTOWN ZONES
a) Within any Downtown Zone, no new surface parking lots shall be permitted
except where the parking is accessory to the main use on the same lot.
April 10, 2024 5-16
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
5.6.6 VISITOR PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS
a) A required visitor parking space provided on a lot shall be clearly identified
and marked as being reserved for such purpose.
5.6.7 ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING SPACE REGULATIONS
a) Permission for Chargers to Encroach Within Required Landscaping Features
and Planting Strips
Notwithstanding any other Section of this By-law, except Section 5.6.7 b)
below, a charging device associated with an Electric Vehicle Parking Space,
including any such space required by Section 5.1.4, may be located within
any of the following required features and will not constitute a reduction of
that feature’s provision:
i) Planting Strip;
ii) Landscape Strip;
iii) Landscaped Area; and,
iv) Landscaped Parking Island.
b) Restrictions for Chargers Encroaching Within Required Landscaping
Features and Planting Strips
Despite Section 5.6.7 a) above, the permission to encroach within the noted
features shall not apply to any of the following:
i) A transformer or mechanical enclosure other than a charging device;
or,
ii) A charging device with a hard-surfaced base exceeding an area of
1.0 square metres.
c) Permission for Chargers to Encroach Within any Required Yard
Notwithstanding any other Section of this By-law, a charging device
associated with an Electric Vehicle Parking Space may be located within any
required yard, except that any such charging device may not be located:
i) less than 0.6 metres from any lot line; or,
ii) within a visibility triangle.
5.7 PARKING SCHEDULES
April 10, 2024 5-17
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
a) Parking Rate Areas
Where this By-law indicates that a Parking Rate Area (PRA) applies for the
purpose of calculating a parking requirement or permission, such Parking
Rate Area shall apply to lands and shall be indicated as Parking Rate Area
(PRA1), (PRA2) and (PRA3) on Schedule “A” – Zoning Maps.
b) Application of Parking Rate Areas
Where a parking rate or requirement contained in this By-law does not
contain reference to a Parking Rate Area (PRA), such parking rate shall
apply to all lands throughout the City. Only where a parking rate refers to a
specific Parking Rate Area, and where such use is located within that
specified Parking Rate Area, shall there be any modification to the parking
rate, and only in the manner prescribed.
5.7.1 MINIMUM REQUIRED PARKING RATE SCHEDULE
a) Minimum Required Parking Rate Schedule
Parking spaces shall be provided in the minimum quantity specified in
Column 2 hereunder for each use listed in Column 1:
Column 1 Column 2
i. Residential Uses
Single Detached Dwelling; a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
Semi-Detached Dwelling;
Street Townhouse Dwelling
b) In all other areas, 1 per unit.
Duplex Dwelling a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
b) In all other areas, a total of 1 parking
space.
Additional Dwelling Unit; a) In PRA 1, PRA 2 or PRA 3, no parking
Additional Dwelling Unit - spaces are required.
Detached
b) In all other areas, 1 per unit.
April 10, 2024 5-18
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Triplex Dwelling a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
b) In PRA 2, a total of 2 parking spaces.
c) In all other areas, 1 per unit.
Fourplex Dwelling a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
b) In PRA 2, a total of 3 parking space.
c) In all other areas, 1 per unit.
Dwelling Unit, and a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use,
where the total number of b) In PRA 2, 0.5 spaces per unit.
such units on the lot is less
than 5 c) In PRA 3, 0.85 spaces per unit.
d) In all other areas, 1 space per unit.
Multiple Dwelling; a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use, for residents, and 2 visitor parking spaces,
where the total number of plus 0.05 visitor parking spaces are required
such units is 5 or greater per unit.
b) In PRA 2, 0.5 spaces per unit for
residents, plus 0.15 visitor parking spaces
per unit.
c) In PRA 3, 0.85 spaces per unit for
residents, plus 0.25 visitor parking spaces
per unit.
d) In all other areas, 1 space per unit for
residents, plus 0.3 visitor parking spaces per
unit.
Residential Care Facility, a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
Emergency Shelter,
Corrections Residence, b) In PRA 2, and,
Lodging House, Retirement
Home i) within a Residential Zone, 1 space for
each building containing such use; or,
April 10, 2024 5-19
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
ii) within any other Zone, 0.5 spaces for
each 3 persons accommodated, plus 0.15
visitor parking spaces for each 3 persons
accommodated.
c) In PRA 3, and,
i) within a Residential Zone, 1 space for
each building containing such use; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 0.85 spaces for
each 3 persons accommodated, plus
0.25 visitor parking spaces for each 3
persons accommodated.
d) In all other areas, and
i) within a Residential Zone, 1 space for
each building containing such use; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 1 space for
each 3 persons accommodated, plus 0.3
visitor parking spaces for each 3
persons accommodated.
ii. Institutional Uses
Day Nursery i) 0.8 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area.
ii) Notwithstanding clause i), no parking shall
be required where a Day Nursery is
located within an Education
Establishment or Place of Worship.
Long Term Care Facility 1 space for each 3 patient beds.
Place of Worship a) In PRA 1, and
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
spaces are required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 6.25 spaces
for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area, inclusive of a basement or
April 10, 2024 5-20
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
cellar, to accommodate such use.
b) In all other areas, 10 spaces for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor area,
inclusive of a basement or cellar, to
accommodate such use.
Hospital 1 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
area.
Social Services Establishment a) In PRA 1, no parking spaces are required.
b) In all other areas, 3.33 spaces for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor area.
iii. Educational
Establishments
Elementary School a) In PRA 1, 1 space for each classroom.
b) In all other areas, 1.25 spaces for each
classroom.
Secondary School a) In PRA 1, 1.5 spaces for each classroom.
b) In PRA 2, 2 spaces for each classroom.
c) In all other areas, 3 spaces for each
classroom.
University, College a) Within a Transit Oriented Corridor Zone, in
accordance with the minimum requirements
applicable to an Educational Establishment.
b) In all other areas, 5 for each classroom
plus 1 for every 7 seat capacity in an
auditorium, theatre or stadium or 5 spaces
for every classroom plus 1 space for each
23.0 square metres of the gross floor area
which accommodates the auditorium, theatre
or stadium, whichever results in greater
requirement.
April 10, 2024 5-21
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Residential Use on the same No parking shall be required for any
lot as a University or College residential use on the same lot as a
University or College.
Educational Establishment a) In PRA 1, 1.5 spaces for each classroom.
b) In PRA 2, 2 spaces for each classroom.
c) In all other areas, 3 spaces for each
classroom.
iv. Commercial Uses
Adult Entertainment Parlour 5 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
area.
Agricultural Supply 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area which accommodates retail and 1
for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
area which accommodates warehousing.
Bowling Alley 4 for each lane.
Building or Contracting Supply 3.33 for each 100 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area which accommodates the Office,
Retail and Showroom component of the use.
Building and Lumber Supply 2 for each 100 square metres of gross floor
Establishment area.
Cinema 1 for every 6 persons accommodated for
such use.
Commercial Motor Vehicle 1 for each 100 square metres of gross floor
Sales, Rental and Service area and 2 for each service bay.
Establishment
Commercial School 2 spaces for each 100 square metres of
gross floor area in excess of 450 square
metres.
Conference or Convention In any Downtown Zone, 1 for each 100
Centre square metres of gross floor area in excess
April 10, 2024 5-22
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
of 450 square metres.
In all other areas, 3.33 for each 100 square
metres of gross floor area.
Courier Establishment 3.33 for each 100 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Driving Range 1.5 for each tee-off pad.
Equipment Sales and Service 1 for each 100 square metres of gross floor
Establishment area.
Financial Establishment a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, 2 for each
100 square metres of gross floor area
in excess of 450 square metres; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 spaces
for each 100 square metres of gross
floor area.
b) In all other areas, 3.33 spaces for each
100 square metres of gross floor area.
Fitness Club a) In PRA 1, 3.5 spaces for each 100 square
metres of gross floor area.
b) In all other areas, 6.67 spaces for each
100 square metres of gross floor area
Funeral Home 5 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
area.
Golf Course 6 for each hole.
Home Furnishing Retail 2 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
area.
Home Improvement Supply 2 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
Establishment area.
April 10, 2024 5-23
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Hotel In PRA 1, 0.6 spaces for each guest room
In all other areas, 0.9 spaces for each guest
room
Laboratory a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
spaces are required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 1 space
for each 100 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates such
use
b) In all other areas, 2 spaces for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area.
Major Recreational Equipment 1 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
Sales and Service area.
Establishment
Marina 1 for each boat slip.
Medical Clinic a) In PRA 1, and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, 2 for each
100 square metres of gross floor area
in excess of 450 square metres; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 spaces
for each 100 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates such
use.
b) In all other areas, 4.5 spaces for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor area.
Mini Golf 1.5 for each hole.
Motor Vehicle Dealership 1 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
area and 2 for each service bay.
Motor Vehicle Gas Bar 4 for each 100.0 square metres of gross floor
April 10, 2024 5-24
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
area.
Motor Vehicle Service Station 4 for each service bay.
Motor Vehicle Washing 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area and 2 for every manual washing
bay.
Office a) In PRA 1, 1.25 for each 100.0 square
metres of gross floor area in excess of 450
square metres.
b) In PRA 2, 2.5 for each 100.0 square
metres of gross floor area in excess of 450
square metres.
c) In all other areas, 3 spaces for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area in excess
of 450 square metres.
Personal Service a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 6.25 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area in excess of 450 square metres.
b) In all other areas, 6.25 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area in excess
of 450 square metres.
Repair Service a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area in excess of 450 square metres
which accommodates the Office,
Retail, and Showroom component of
the use.
April 10, 2024 5-25
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
b) 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of
gross floor area in excess of 450 square
metres which accommodates the Office,
Retail, and Showroom component of the use.
Restaurant a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area in excess of 450 square metres
which accommodates such use.
b) In all other areas, 12.5 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area in excess
of 450 square metres which accommodates
such use.
Retail a) In PRA 1, and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area in excess of 450 square metres
which accommodates such use.
b) In all other areas,
i) 5.5 for each 100.0 square metres of
gross floor area between 450.0
square metres and 4,000 square
metres; and,
ii) 2 for each 100.0 square metres of
gross floor area greater than 4,000.0
square metres.
April 10, 2024 5-26
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Shopping Centre a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area in excess of 450 square metres
which accommodates such use.
b) In all other areas,
i) 5.5 for each 100.0 square metres of
gross floor area between 450.0
square metres and 4,000 square
metres; and,
ii) 2 for each 100.0 square metres of
gross floor area greater than 4,000.0
square metres.
Performing Arts Theatre 1 for each 10 persons accommodated.
Warehouse a) In PRA 1, 0.75 for each 100.0 square
metres of gross floor area which
accommodates the office portion of such
use.
b) In all other areas, 3.33 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area which
accommodates the Office component of the
use.
Other Commercial Uses not a) In PRA 1, and,
Listed Above
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 2 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area which accommodates such use.
b) In all other areas, 3.33 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area.
April 10, 2024 5-27
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
v. Industrial Uses
Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Commercial Motor Vehicle 0.87 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Sales, Rental and Service floor area.
Establishment
Commercial Motor Vehicle 4 for each service bay.
Washing Establishment
Communications 2 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area which accommodates such use.
Contractor’s Establishment 0.87 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area.
Dry Cleaning Plant 0.87 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area.
Equipment and Machinery 1 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Sales, Rental and Service floor area.
Establishment
Industrial Administrative Office 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area.
Laboratory a) In PRA 1, and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
spaces are required; or,
ii) within any other Zone, 1 space
for each 100 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates such
use.
b) In all other areas, 2 spaces for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area.
Labour Association Hall 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
April 10, 2024 5-28
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
floor area.
Landscape Contracting 0.87 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area.
Manufacturing a) In PRA 1, 1.6 for each 100.0 square
metres of gross floor area which
accommodates the Office component of the
use, plus 0.5 for each 100.0 square metres
of gross floor area, which accommodates
the remainder of the use.
b) In all other areas, 3.33 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area which
accommodates the Office component of the
use, plus 0.5 for each 100.0 square metres
of gross floor area, which accommodates
the remainder of the use.
Marine Service 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair 0.87 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area.
Planned Business Centre 2 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
within an Industrial Zone, floor area.
except an M4 Zone
Planned Business Centre a) In PRA 1, 2 for each 100.0 square metres
within an M4 Zone of gross floor area, and:
i) where a Restaurant occupies more
than 30 percent of the gross floor area
of the planned business centre, the
specific parking requirement for the
Restaurant shall be required in
addition to the planned business
centre requirement for the remaining
gross floor area of the planned
business centre; and,
ii) where a Medical Clinic occupies
April 10, 2024 5-29
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
more than 30 percent of the gross
floor area of the planned business
centre, the specific parking
requirement for the Medical Clinic
shall be required in addition to the
planned business centre requirement
for the remaining gross floor area of
the planned business centre.
b) In all other areas, 3.33 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area, and:
i) where a Restaurant occupies more
than 30 percent of the gross floor area
of the planned business centre, the
specific parking requirement for the
Restaurant shall be required in
addition to the planned business
centre requirement for the remaining
gross floor area of the planned
business centre; and,
ii) where a Medical Clinic occupies
more than 30 percent of the gross
floor area of the planned business
centre, the specific parking
requirement for the Medical Clinic
shall be required in addition to the
planned business centre requirement
for the remaining gross floor area of
the planned business centre.
Private Power Generation 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Facility floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Production Studio 0.5 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area.
Repair Service a) In PRA 1 and,
i) within a Downtown Zone, no parking
is required; or,
April 10, 2024 5-30
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
ii) within any other Zone, 2 for each
100.0 square metres of gross floor
area in excess of 450 square metres
which accommodates the Office,
Retail, and Showroom component of
the use.
b) 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of
gross floor area in excess of 450 square
metres which accommodates the Office,
Retail, and Showroom component of the use.
Research and Development 1.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment within an M1 floor area, which accommodates such use,
Zone except for that portion of the building used
for laboratory, warehouse or manufacturing
uses where 0.87 for each 100.0 square
metres of gross floor area shall be required.
Research and Development 2 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Establishment within an floor area.
Industrial Zone, except an M1
Zone
Salvage Yard 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
and Retail component of the use.
Surveying, Engineering, 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Planning or Design Business floor area.
Towing Establishment 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Trade School 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Tradesperson’s Shop 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office,
Retail and Showroom component of the use.
Transport Terminal 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
April 10, 2024 5-31
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
floor area which accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Waste Management Facility; 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
Waste Processing Facility; floor area which accommodates the Office
Waste Transfer Facility; component of the use.
Hazardous Waste
Management Facility; and
Waste Disposal Facility
vi. Agricultural Uses
Agriculture, except for a No parking is required.
specific Agriculture use noted
below
Single Detached Farm 1 space per unit.
Dwelling
Aquaponics; a) In an A1, A2, E1, or E2 Zone, no parking
Cannabis Growing and is required.
Harvesting Facility;
Greenhouses b) In all other areas, 3.33 for each 100.0
square metres of gross floor area which
accommodates the Office component of the
use, plus 0.5 for each 100.0 square metres
of gross floor area, which accommodates
the remainder of the use.
Farm Product Supply Dealer 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the
Showroom component of the use.
Kennel 3.33 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area which accommodates the Office
and Retail component of the use.
5.7.2 MAXIMUM PERMITTED PARKING RATE SCHEDULE
a) Maximum Permitted Parking Rate Schedule
For any use listed in Column 1, the number of parking spaces provided shall
not exceed the number in Column 2:
April 10, 2024 5-32
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Column 1 Column 2
i. Residential Uses
Multiple Dwelling, and a) In PRA 1, 1 space per unit, inclusive of
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use, resident and visitor parking spaces.
where the total number of
such units is 5 or greater b) In PRA 2, 1.25 spaces per unit, inclusive of
resident and visitor parking spaces.
c) In PRA 3, 2 spaces per unit, inclusive of
resident and visitor parking spaces.
5.7.3 MINIMUM ACCESSIBLE PARKING RATE SCHEDULE
a) Minimum Accessible Parking Rate Schedules
The minimum number of accessible parking spaces which must be provided
shall be the greater minimum number resulting from the calculations in
Sections 5.7.3 b) and 5.7.3 c) below, with numeric fractions rounded up in
accordance with Section 5.1.1 c) ii) and iii).
b) Minimum Accessible Parking Calculation 1 - Proportionate to Parking
Provision
On a lot containing 5 or more parking spaces, a minimum number of the
parking spaces provided shall meet the requirements of the Minimum
Accessible Parking Rate Schedule below:
Column 1 Column 2
Total Number of Parking Minimum Number of Accessible Parking
Spaces Provided Spaces
5 – 100 spaces Minimum 4% of the total number of parking
spaces provided;
101 – 200 spaces Minimum 1 space + 3% of the total number of
parking spaces provided;
201 - 1000 spaces Minimum 2 spaces + 2% of the total number of
parking spaces provided; and,
1000 or more spaces Minimum 11 + 1% of the total number of
required parking spaces.
April 10, 2024 5-33
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
c) Minimum Accessible Parking Calculation 2 - Where Total Parking Provision
is Reduced Pursuant to a Parking Rate Area or Downtown Zone
The minimum number of accessible parking spaces which must be provided
shall be:
i) In any Zone, except a Downtown Zone, the result of:
a) applying the requirements of Section 5.7.1 to all uses,
excluding the existing gross floor area within any existing
building, and excluding the application of any Parking Rate
Area or Downtown Zone, to produce a total number of parking
spaces; and,
b) applying the corresponding requirement listed in Column 2 of
Schedule 5.7.3 b) to the total number of parking spaces
resulting from the calculation in Section 5.7.3 c) i) a)
immediately above to produce the minimum required number
of accessible parking spaces.
ii) In any Downtown Zone, the result of applying Column 2 hereunder for
each use listed in Column 1, excluding any existing gross floor area
within any existing building:
Column 1 Column 2
Use Within any Downtown Zone Minimum Number of Accessible Parking
Spaces
i. Residential Uses
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use 0.02 per unit in excess of 12 dwelling units.
Multiple Dwelling
Residential Care Facility, 0.04 for each 3 persons accommodated or
Emergency Shelter, Lodging designed for accommodation.
House, Retirement Home
ii. Institutional Uses
Long Term Care Facility 0.04 for each 3 patient beds.
April 10, 2024 5-34
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
Day Nursery, except a Day 0.03 for each 100 square metres of gross
Nursery located within an floor area.
Educational Establishment
Social Services Establishment 0.08 for each 100.0 square metres of gross
floor area.
iii. Educational Establishments
Elementary School 0.05 for each classroom.
Secondary School
0.12 for each classroom plus 0.04 for each
7 seat capacity in an auditorium, theatre or
stadium.
University, College 0.2 for each classroom plus 0.04 for every
7 seat capacity in an auditorium, theatre or
stadium or 0.2 spaces for every classroom
plus 0.04 space for each 23 square metres
of the gross floor area which
accommodates the auditorium, theatre or
stadium, whichever results in greater
requirement.
Residential use on the same lot None required
as a University or College
iv. Commercial Uses No requirement applies unless specifically
listed in the subsection below.
Commercial School; 0.08 for each 100 square metres of gross
Financial Establishment; floor area in excess of 500 square metres.
Medical Clinic;
Office;
Veterinary Service
Hotel 0.03 per guest room.
Conference or Convention Centre 0.04 for each 100 square metres of gross
floor area in excess of 550 square metres.
5.7.4 MINIMUM ELECTRIC VEHICLE PARKING RATE SCHEDULE
a) Minimum Electric Vehicle Parking Rate Schedule
Of the parking spaces provided on a lot, a minimum percentage shall be
provided as Electric Vehicle Parking Spaces, as specified in Column 2
April 10, 2024 5-35
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
hereunder for each associated use listed in Column 1, and any such Electric
Vehicle Parking Spaces shall be subject to Section 5.6.7:
Column 1 Column 2
i. Residential Uses
Single Detached Dwelling; 100% of all parking spaces.
Semi-Detached Dwelling;
Street Townhouse Dwelling;
Duplex Dwelling;
Triplex Dwelling;
Fourplex Dwelling;
Dwelling Unit; 100% of all parking spaces, excluding any
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use; visitor parking space.
Multiple Dwelling
ii. All Other Uses
All uses other than the specific 50% of all parking spaces.
uses listed above
5.7.5 MINIMUM BICYCLE PARKING RATE SCHEDULE
a) Minimum Required Bicycle Parking Rate Schedule
For each building containing one or more of the uses listed in Column 1 in
the following schedule:
i) Short-term Bicycle Parking Spaces shall be provided in the minimum
quantity specified in Column 2 and subject to the regulations in
Section 5.4.2; and
ii) Long-term Bicycle Parking Spaces shall be provided in the minimum
quantity specified in Column 3 and subject to the regulations in
Section 5.4.2.
Column 1 Column 2 (Short-term Column 3 (Long-term
Bicycle Parking) Bicycle Parking)
April 10, 2024 5-36
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
i. Residential Uses
Multiple Dwelling, and a) In Parking Rate Area a) In Parking Rate Area
Dwelling Unit, Mixed Use, (PRA) 1 and PRA 2, 0.1 (PRA) 1 and PRA 2, 0.7
where the total number of per unit. per unit.
such units exceeds 4
b) In all other areas, b) In all other areas, 0.5
0.05 per unit. per unit.
Lodging House a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2, a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2,
0.1 per lodging unit. 0.7 per lodging unit.
b) In all other areas, b) In all other areas, 0.5
0.05 per lodging unit. per lodging unit.
ii. Non-Residential Uses
Commercial a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2, a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2,
Entertainment; 0.2 for each 100 square 0.15 for each 100
Commercial Recreation; metres of gross floor square metres of gross
Commercial School; area. floor area.
Educational
Establishment; b) In all other areas, b) In all other areas, 0.1
Medical Clinic; 0.15 for each 100 for each 100 square
Office; square metres of gross metres of gross floor
Personal Services; floor area. area.
Place of Worship;
Restaurant;
Retail;
Commercial or
Institutional uses not
listed above
Manufacturing; a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2, a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2,
Warehouse; 0.2 for each 100 square 0.15 for each 100
Any other industrial use metres of gross floor square metres of gross
not listed above area which floor area.
accommodates the
Office, Retail, and
Showroom component
of the use.
April 10, 2024 5-37
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 5: PARKING ZONING BY-LAW
b) In all other areas, b) In all other areas, 0.1
0.15 for each 100 for each 100 square
square metres of gross metres of gross floor
floor area which area.
accommodates the
Office, Retail, and
Showroom component
of the use.
Elementary School; a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2, a) In PRA 1 and PRA 2,
Secondary School 0.2 for each 100 square 0.15 for each 100
metres of gross floor square metres of gross
area. floor area.
b) In all other areas, b) In all other areas, 0.1
0.15 for each 100 for each 100 square
square metres of gross metres of gross floor
floor area. area.
University, College In all areas, 1.2 for In all areas, 1 for each
each 100 square 100 square metres of
metres of gross floor gross floor area.
area.
(By-law No. 24-052, April 10, 2024, not final & binding)
April 10, 2024 5-38



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 60 downtown zones general provisionspdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
6.0 DOWNTOWN ZONES GENERAL PROVISIONS
In addition to the regulations of Sections 6.1, 6.2, and 6.5 of this By-law, the
following Downtown Zones General Provisions shall also apply:
a) Notwithstanding Section 3: Definitions as it relates to the definition of
Development and Front Lot Line – Corner Lot the following shall apply:
i) Development A change in the use of any land, building, or
structure for any purpose, and shall include
the carrying out of any building, engineering
construction, demolition, or other operation in,
on, over or under land, or the construction,
addition or alteration of any building or
structure.
ii) Front Lot Line – shall mean at the option of the owner, either
Corner Lot of the lot lines abutting a public street.
b) In the case of buildings constructed after the effective date of this By-
law, for any building equal to or less than 44.0 metres in height the
following special regulations shall also apply:
i) A minimum 3.0 metre stepback shall be required from the building
base façade height shown in Schedule “F” – Special Figure 15.
ii) A minimum 3.0 metre stepback shall be required for any portion of
a building exceeding 22.0 metres in height from a side or rear lot
line.
c) In the case of buildings constructed after the effective date of this By-
law, for any building exceeding 44.0 metres in height the following
special regulations shall also apply:
i) A minimum 3.0 metre stepback shall be required from the building
base façade height shown in Schedule “F” – Special Figure 15.
ii) A minimum 3.0 metre stepback shall be required for any portion of
a building exceeding 22.0 metres in height from a side or rear lot
line except any flankage lot line.
iii) The following additional stepbacks shall be required for any portion
of building exceeding 44.0 metres in height:
1. Minimum of 9.5 metres from a lot line abutting a laneway;
August 14, 2019 6.1-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
and,
2. Minimum 12.5 metres from all side and rear lot lines except
any flankage lot line.
iv) Notwithstanding Section 6.1.3 a) i) of this By-law, for lands zoned
Downtown Central Business District (D1) Zone, a maximum 10.0
metre setback from a street line shall be permitted for a yard where
an Urban Square with a minimum size of 135.0 square metres has
been provided.
v) Notwithstanding Section 4.7 of this By-law a minimum lot frontage
of 35.0 metres is required.
vi) Notwithstanding Section 4.7 of this By-law a minimum lot area of
1,575.0 square metres is required.
d) In addition to 6.0 a) above, for that portion of a building exceeding 44.0
metres in height a distance of 25.0 metres shall be provided between
exterior walls on the same property.
e) For the lots delineated as a Heritage Character Zone on Figure 2 of
Schedule “F” – Special Figures, where construction and/or alteration to
the façade of a building are proposed, the following regulations shall
also apply:
i) A minimum of 60% of the area of the ground floor façade shall be
comprised of clear glazed windows and doors. Window and
doorframes, clear glazed transoms and sidelights, doors with at
least 50% clear glazing, and a sill up to 0.6m in height are
permitted to be included in the calculation of the clear glazed area.
Signage and opaque/spandrel glazing shall not be included in the
calculation of the clear glazed area;
ii) A minimum of 25% and a maximum of 40% of the façade of the
second and third storeys shall be composed of windows. Window
and doorframes, clear glazed transoms and sidelights, doors with
at least 50% clear glazing, and a sill up to 0.6m in height are
permitted to be included in the calculation of the clear glazed area.
Signage and opaque/spandrel glazing shall not be included in the
calculation of the clear glazed area;
iii) The ground floor storey shall be no less than 3.6 metres in height
and no greater than 4.5 metres in height. The second and third
storeys shall each be no less than 3.0 metres in height and no
greater than 4.0 metres in height; and,
August 14, 2019 6.1-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
iv) Exterior building cladding for the first three storeys, except
decorative architectural features (such as window and door frames,
sills, lintels, surrounds, and cornices), shall be of either one or a
combination of no more than two of the following materials:
1. Brick;
2. Concrete panels;
3. Stone block, stone veneer or artificial stone;
4. Stucco; or,
5. Metal and metal panels, excluding aluminium siding or any
metal variant thereof.
f) Notwithstanding the above, for properties designated under the Ontario
Heritage Act, any alternative building design or building materials
approved through the issuance of a Heritage Permit shall be deemed to
comply with this Section.
g) Parking Unless otherwise regulated by the Downtown Zones,
parking shall be provided in accordance with Section 5
of this By-law.
h) Accessory Unless otherwise regulated by the Downtown Zones,
Buildings Accessory Buildings shall be in accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law 18-114, May 9, 2018)
August 14, 2019 6.1-3



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 61 downtown central business district d1 zonepdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
“6.1 DOWNTOWN CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (D1) ZONE
Explanatory Note: The D1 Zone represents the cultural, institutional, residential,
and commercial make-up of Downtown Hamilton. The Zone provides for a wide
variety of mixtures in stand-alone or mixed use buildings. The intent of the
permitted uses and built form is to create a complete, vibrant, transit-oriented
area where people come to live, work, and play.
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Downtown D1 Zone for any purpose other than one or
more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or use shall
also comply Section 6.0 Downtown Zones General Provisions and with the
prescribed regulations below:
6.1.1 PERMITTED Artist Studio
USES Beverage Making Establishment
Catering Service
Commercial Entertainment
Commercial Recreation
Commercial School
Community Garden
Conference or Convention Centre
Craftsperson Shop
Day Nursery
Duplex Dwelling
Dwelling Unit(s)
Educational Establishment
Exhibition Facility
Financial Establishment
Hotel
Laboratory
Lodging House
Long Term Care Facility
Medical Clinic
Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment
Multiple Dwelling
Office
Personal Services
Place of Assembly
Place of Worship
Repair Service
Restaurant
Retail
Retirement Home
Social Services Establishment
Tradesperson’s Shop
August 14, 2019 6.1-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Transportation Depot
Urban Farm
Urban Farmers Market
Veterinary Service
6.1.1.1 RESTRICTED i) In addition to Section 6.1.1, the following
USES uses shall only be permitted in accordance
with Section 6.1.3 and the following
additional restrictions:
1. Parking Facility
In the case of a Parking Facility
developed after the effective date of this
By-law, such facility:
A. shall only be contained within a
building; and,
B. with the exception of an access
driveway to the parking facility, the
ground floor of the facility which
faces any street shall only be used
for permitted uses, other than
parking.
C. in addition to 6.1.1.1 i) 1. B. above,
any parking structure located above
the ground floor shall be screened
from view from the public sidewalk.
2. Microbrewery
A Microbrewery shall have a maximum
Gross Floor Area of 700.0 square
metres.
3. Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment
Any motor vehicles that are stored or
parked for rental purposes shall only be
located in an enclosed parking structure
or a fully enclosed building.
August 14, 2019 6.1-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
4. Duplex Dwelling
A Duplex Dwelling shall only be
permitted as a result of the conversion
of an existing Single Detached Dwelling.
6.1.2 PROHIBITED i) Notwithstanding Section 6.1.1, the following
USES uses are prohibited, even as an accessory
use:
Drive-Through Facility
Dry Cleaning Plant
Motor Vehicle Dealership
Motor Vehicle Gas Bar
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
ii) Notwithstanding Section 6.1.1, the following
uses are prohibited, except if considered an
accessory use to another permitted use:
Amusement Arcade
Garden Centre
6.1.3 REGULATIONS
a) Building Setback i) Maximum 4.5 metres for any portion of
from a Street Line building below 11.0 metres in height, except
where a visibility triangle shall be provided
for a driveway access;
ii) Notwithstanding Section 6.1.3 a) i) above, a
maximum setback of 6.0 metres for that
portion of a building providing an access
driveway to a garage.
iii) Section 6.1.3 a) i) above, shall not apply for
any portion of a building that exceeds the
requirement established in Section 6.1.3 c)
ii) or iii) below.
iv) Where a building(s) has been constructed
and complies with Section 6.1.3 c) ii) or iii)
below, additional buildings constructed on
the subject property shall not be subject to
August 14, 2019 6.1-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Section 6.1.3 a) i) above, as it relates to the
setback from a front lot line.
v) Rooftop mechanical penthouse, stair tower
and elevator bulkhead shall not be subject
to Section 6.1.3 a) i) above.
vi) Accessory buildings and structures shall not
be subject to Section 6.1.3 a) i).
b) Building Height i) Minimum 7.5 metres; and,
ii) Maximum Building Height shall be in
accordance with Figure 1 of Schedule “F” –
Special Figures.
c) Built Form for In the case of buildings constructed after the
New effective date of this By-law or additions to
Development buildings existing as of the effective date of this
By-law the following regulations shall apply:
i) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
located and/or screened from view of any
abutting street; and,
ii) For an interior lot or a through lot the
minimum width of the ground floor façade
facing the front lot line shall:
1. be greater than or equal to 75% of the
measurement of the front lot line; and,
2. comply with Section 6.1.3 a) i) above.
iii) For a corner lot the minimum combined
width of the ground floor façade facing the
front lot line and flankage lot line shall:
1. be greater than or equal to 50% of the
measurement of the front lot line and
flankage lot line; and,
2. comply with Section 6.1.3 a) i) above.
iv) Notwithstanding Section 6.1.3 c) ii) and iii)
above, a driveway with a maximum width of
August 14, 2019 6.1-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
7.5 metres shall be permitted for ingress
and egress.
v) No parking or aisles shall be located
between the required building façade and
the front lot line or flankage lot line.
vi) A minimum of one principal entrance shall
be provided:
1. within the ground floor façade setback
the least distance from a street; and,
2. shall be accessible from the building
façade with direct access from the
public sidewalk.
vii) Notwithstanding the definition of a planting
strip, a sidewalk shall be permitted where
required by Section 6.1.3 c) vi) above.
d) Outdoor Storage i) No outdoor storage of goods, materials, or
equipment shall be permitted.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 6.1.3 d) i) above,
the outdoor display of goods or materials
for retail purposes accessory to a retail
use shall only be permitted in a front yard
or flankage yard.
e) Maximum Lot 85%
Coverage
f) Minimum Amenity On a lot containing more than 10 dwelling units,
Area for Dwelling the following Minimum Amenity Area
Units and Multiple requirements be provided:
Dwellings
i) An area of 4.0 square metres for each
dwelling unit; and,
ii) In addition to the definition of Amenity
Area in Section 3: Definitions, an Amenity
Area located outdoors shall be
unobstructed and shall be at or above the
surface, and exposed to light and air.
August 14, 2019 6.1-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
g) Green Roof for Notwithstanding Section 6.1.3 f) i) above, for
Multiple Dwelling every 0.5 square metres of Green Roof area
provided, the required Amenity Area may be
reduced by 1.0 square metre.
6.1.4 URBAN FARM In accordance with the requirements of Section
REGULATIONS 4.26 of this By-law.
6.1.5 COMMUNITY In accordance with the requirements of Section
GARDEN 4.27 of this By-law.
REGULATIONS
6.1.6 URBAN In accordance with the requirements of Section
FARMERS 4.28 of this By-law.
MARKET
REGULATIONS
(By-law 18-114, May 9, 2018)
August 14, 2019 6.1-6



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 62 downtown prime retail streets d2 zonepdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
“6.2 DOWNTOWN MIXED USE - PEDESTRIAN FOCUS (D2) ZONE
Explanatory Note: The D2 Zone applies along King Street, James Street and
portions of Hess Village and King William Street. These streets have been
acknowledged as vibrant streets with active street level uses and pedestrian
oriented built form. To maintain the character of these streets the D2 Zone
requires that commercial uses be located at the street level and allows for
residential uses above the ground floor. The intent of the D2 Zone is to provide a
range of uses and built form that creates an inviting pedestrian experience.
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within a Downtown D2 Zone for any purpose other than one or
more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or use shall
also comply Section 6.0 Downtown Zones General Provisions and with the
prescribed regulations below:
6.2.1 PERMITTED Artist Studio
USES Beverage Making Establishment
Catering Service
Commercial Entertainment
Commercial Recreation
Commercial School
Community Garden
Conference or Convention Centre
Craftsperson Shop
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit(s)
Educational Establishment
Financial Establishment
Hotel
Laboratory
Lodging House
Medical Clinic
Microbrewery
Multiple Dwelling
Office
Personal Services
Place of Assembly
Place of Worship
Repair Service
Restaurant
Retail
Tradesperson’s Shop
Urban Farm
Urban Farmers Market
Veterinary Service
August 14, 2019 6.2-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
6.2.1.1 RESTRICTED i) In addition to Section 6.2.1, the following
USES uses shall only be permitted in accordance
with Section 6.2.3 and the following
additional restrictions:
1. Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit(s)
Multiple Dwelling
Place of Worship
A. Shall not be permitted within the
ground floor, except for access,
accessory office and utility areas.
2. Microbrewery
A Microbrewery shall have a maximum
Gross Floor Area of 700.0 square
metres.
3. Parking Facility
In the case of a Parking Facility
developed after the effective date of
this By-law, such facility:
A. Shall only be contained within a
building; and,
B. With the exception of an access
driveway to the parking facility,
the ground floor of the facility
which faces any street shall only
be used for permitted uses, other
than parking.
C. In addition to 6.2.1.1 i) 3. B)
above, any parking structure
located above the ground floor
shall be screened from view from
the public sidewalk.
6.2.2 PROHIBITED
USES
i) Notwithstanding Section 6.2.1, the following
August 14, 2019 6.2-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
uses are prohibited, even as an accessory
use:
Drive-Through Facility
Dry Cleaning Plant
Motor Vehicle Dealership
Motor Vehicle Gas Bar
Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
ii) Notwithstanding Section 6.2.1, the following
uses are prohibited, except if considered an
accessory use to another permitted use:
Amusement Arcade
Garden Centre
6.2.3 REGULATIONS
a) Building Setback i) Maximum 2.0 metres for any portion of
from a Street Line building below 11.0 metres in height, except
where a visibility triangle shall be provided
for a driveway access;
ii) Notwithstanding Section 6.2.3 a) i) above, a
maximum setback of 6.0 metres for that
portion of a building providing an access
driveway to a garage.
iii) Section 6.2.3 a) i) above, shall not apply for
any portion of a building that exceeds the
requirement established in Section 6.2.3 c)
ii) or iii) below.
iv) Where a building(s) has been constructed
and complies with Section 6.2.3 c) ii) or iii)
below, additional buildings constructed on
the subject property shall not be subject to
Section 6.2.3 a) i) above, as it relates to the
setback from a front lot line.
v) Rooftop mechanical penthouse, stair tower
and elevator bulkhead shall not be subject
to Section 6.2.3 a) i) above.
August 14, 2019 6.2-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
vi) Accessory buildings and structures shall not
be subject to Section 6.2.3 a) i).
b) Building Height i) Minimum 11.0 metres;
ii) Maximum Building Height shall be in
accordance Figure 1 of Schedule “F” –
Special Figures.
c) Built Form for In the case of buildings constructed after the
New effective date of this By-law or additions to
Development buildings existing as of the effective date of this
By-law the following regulations shall apply:
i) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be
located and/or screened from view of any
abutting street;
ii) For an interior lot or a through lot the
minimum width of the ground floor façade
facing the front lot line shall:
1. Be greater than or equal to 75% of
the measurement of the front lot line;
and,
2. Comply with Section 6.2.3 a) i)
above.
iii) For a corner lot the minimum combined
width of the ground floor façade facing the
front lot line and flankage lot line shall:
1. Be greater than or equal to 50% of
the measurement of the front lot line
and flankage lot line; and,
2. Comply with Section 6.2.3 a) i)
above.
iv) Notwithstanding Section 6.2.3 c) ii) and iii)
above, a driveway with a maximum width
of 7.5 metres shall be permitted for ingress
and egress.
v) No parking or aisles shall be located
August 14, 2019 6.2-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 6: DOWNTOWN ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
between the required building façade and
the front lot line or flankage lot line.
vi) A minimum of one principal entrance shall
be provided:
1. within the ground floor building
façade setback the least distance
from a street; and,
2. shall be accessible from the building
façade with direct access from the
public sidewalk.
d) Outdoor Storage i) No outdoor storage of goods, materials, or
equipment shall be permitted.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 6.2.3 d) i) above,
the outdoor display of goods or materials
for retail purposes accessory to a retail
use shall only be permitted in a front yard
or flankage yard.
6.2.4 URBAN FARM In accordance with the requirements of Section
REGULATIONS 4.26 of this By-law.
6.2.5 COMMUNITY In accordance with the requirements of Section
GARDEN 4.27 of this By-law.
REGULATIONS
6.2.6 URBAN In accordance with the requirements of Section
FARMERS 4.28 of this By-law.”
MARKET
(By-law 18-114, May 9, 2018)
August 14, 2019 6.2-5



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 910  airport light industrial m10 zonepdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.10 AIRPORT LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M10) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Light Industrial (M10) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.10.1 PERMITTED USES Airport Waste Processing Facility
Airport Waste Transfer Facility
Alcohol Production Facility (By-law No. 18-
219, August 17, 2018)
Animal Shelter
Aquaponics (By-law No. 18-266, September 12,
2018)
Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting
Facility (By-law No. 18-266, September 12,
2018)
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Communications Establishment
Courier Establishment
Dry Cleaning Plant
Educational Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Greenhouse (By-law No. 18-266, September 12,
2018)
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Office
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson’s Shop
Transport Terminal
May 10, 2019 9.10-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Warehouse
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
9.10.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.10.1, the
following types of manufacturing
uses are prohibited, except if these
uses are considered only as an
accessory use to another permitted
manufacturing use:
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur Products
Outdoor Storage
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber or Plastic
Processing or Refining of Petroleum
or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of Meat,
Poultry or Fish or by-products
thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.10.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
Elementary School
Rock Crushing Plant
Secondary School
iii) The following uses are be
prohibited, except as an accessory
use to another permitted use:
May 10, 2019 9.10-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Commercial Recreation, restricted
to a Fitness Centre
Personal Service
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
9.10.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 60.0 metres;
c) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres;
Street
d) Maximum Building Height In accordance with the regulations of
Section 4.17 of this By-law.
e) Built Form Regulations for The minimum length of the ground floor
New Development façade shall be equal to 50% or more of
the measurement of the front lot line.
f) Landscaped Area Minimum 3.0 metre wide Landscaped
Area shall be provided and maintained
abutting a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
g) Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall be
Outdoor Assembly permitted only as an accessory use and
the following regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in a
Front Yard or a required Flankage
Yard;
ii)iiiiiOutdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iii)iiiiiOutdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this By-law.
May 10, 2019 9.10-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
h) Location of Outdoor Display Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and shall be permitted in
a yard abutting a street, but shall be no
closer than 3.0 metres to the lot line.
i) Location Restriction of i) In addition to the Regulations of
Airport Waste Processing Section 9.10.3, any building,
Facility and Airport Waste structure or land used for an Airport
Transfer Facility Waste Processing Facility or an
Airport Waste Transfer Facility, shall
be located a minimum of 300.0
metres from a Residentially Zoned
or Institutionally Zoned property lot
line;
ii) In addition to i) above, an Airport
Waste Processing Facility or an
Airport Waste Transfer Facility shall
only be permitted within wholly
enclosed buildings.
j) Maximum Gross Floor Area An Industrial Administrative Office or a
for Industrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
k) Maximum Gross Floor Area 5,000 square metres
for an Alcohol Production (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Facility
l) Maximum Combined Gross 25% of the gross floor area of the
Floor Area for Accessory principal use or 500.0 square metres
Retail, Showroom Area and gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
Tasting Room
m) Additional Regulations for In addition to the regulations of Section
Cannabis Growing and 9.10.3, the following additional
Harvesting Facility regulations shall apply:
i) Notwithstanding Section 9.10.3 g),
no outdoor storage or outdoor
assembly shall be permitted.
ii) Retail sales shall be permitted in
May 10, 2019 9.10-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
accordance with Section 9.10.3 l)
(By-law No.21-189, October 13, 2021)
iii) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 c),
any building or structure used for a
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting
Facility shall be setback a minimum
of 150 metres from:
a) Any portion of a lot line
abutting a Residential,
Institutional or Commercial
and Mixed Use Zone; and,
b) Any residential dwelling unit
existing at the date of passing
of the by-law, any building
used for farm labour
residence, mobile home,
educational establishment,
residential care facility, place
of worship, day care or parking
in a Rural Classification Zone.
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
n) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
o) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No.21-189, October 13, 2021)
(By-law No. 10-288, October 13, 2010 – OMB approval April 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
May 10, 2019 9.10-5



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 911  airport prestige business m11 zonepdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.11 AIRPORT PRESTIGE BUSINESS (M11) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Prestige Business (M11) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.11.1 PERMITTED USES Alcohol Production Facility (By-law No. 18-
219, August 17, 2018)
Aquaponics (By-law No. 18-266, September 12,
2018)
Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting
Facility (By-law No. 18-266, September 12,
2018)
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Communications Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Courier Establishment
Educational Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Greenhouse (By-law No. 18-266, September 12,
2018)
Hotel
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Office
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson’s Shop
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
May 10, 2019 9.11-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Warehouse
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
9.11.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.11.1, the
following types of manufacturing uses
a re prohibited, even as an accessory
use:
Explosives Manufacturing
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur Products
Outdoor Storage
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, Plastic,
Asphalt or Cement, not including
mixing, blending, treatment or
similar process
Processing or Refining of
Petroleum or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Pulp and Paper Mills
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of Meat,
Poultry or Fish or by-products
thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Waste Processing Facility
Waste Transfer Facility
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.11.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
Elementary School
Outdoor Storage
Place of Worship
Rock Crushing Plant
Secondary School
Waste Processing Facility
May 10, 2019 9.11-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Waste Transfer Facility
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
iii) The following uses are be
prohibited, except as an accessory
use to another permitted use:
Commercial Recreation, restricted
to a Fitness Centre
Personal Service
iv) Notwithstanding Section 9.11.1, the
following use is permitted only as
an accessory use to a Motor
Vehicle Service Station:
Motor Vehicle Washing
Establishment
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
9.11.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
b) Minimum Lot Width 60.0 metres, where a lot has frontage on
Garner Road or Glancaster Road.
c) Yard Abutting a Street i) Minimum 6.0 metres
ii) Maximum 27.0 metres
(By-law No. 19-062, March 27, 2019)
d) Minimum Side Yard 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone.
e) Minimum Rear Yard 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone.
f) Maximum Building Height i) In accordance with the regulations of
Section 4.17 of this By-law.
ii) 15.0 metres, abutting a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, or has
frontage on Garner Road or
Glancaster Road, or Twenty Road,
May 10, 2019 9.11-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
but shall not exceed the maximum
building height established by i)
above.
iii) In addition to ii) above, maximum
building height may be equivalently
increased as yard increases beyond
minimum yard requirement
established in 9.11.3 d) above, but
shall not exceed the maximum
building height established by i)
above.
g) Location Restriction of Any building or structure or part thereof,
Manufacturing Uses excluding accessory office space, used
for Manufacturing shall be setback a
minimum 20.0 metres from any portion of
a property lot line abutting a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone property lot
line.
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
h) Additional Regulations for Any outdoor training facilities shall be
Outdoor Training Facilities prohibited.
associated with a Trade
School
i) Maximum Gross Floor Area 3,000 square metres
for Office Use within an
Individual Building
j) Additional Regulations for An Industrial Administrative Office or a
Industrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
k) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 15% of total Lot Area;
ii) 6.0 metre wide Landscaped Area
shall be provided and maintained
abutting a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
ii) Where a property lot line abuts a
property lot line within a Residential
May 10, 2019 9.11-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Zone or an Institutional Zone, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
Strip shall be provided and
maintained.
l) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone lot line, in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-
law.
m) Location and Size of Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
Outdoor Display equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and the following
regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Display shall be permitted in
a yard abutting a street, but shall be
no closer than 3.0 metres to the lot
line;
ii) In addition to i) above, the area
devoted to Outdoor Display shall be
limited to a combined maximum of
25% of the Landscaped Area.
n) Maximum Gross Floor Area 5,000 square metres
for an Alcohol Production (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Facility
o) Additional Regulations for In addition to the regulations of Section
Cannabis Growing and 9.11.3, the following additional
Harvesting Facility regulations shall apply:
i) Notwithstanding Section 9.11.3 m),
no outdoor storage or outdoor
assembly shall be permitted.
ii) Retail sales shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 9.11.3 p)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
iii) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 c), any
building or structure used for a
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting
Facility shall be setback a minimum
of 150 metres from:
May 10, 2019 9.11-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
a) Any portion of a lot line abutting
a Residential, Institutional or
Commercial and Mixed Use
Zone; and,
b) Any residential dwelling unit
existing at the date of passing
of the by-law, any building used
for farm labour residence,
mobile home, educational
establishment, residential care
facility, place of worship, day
care or park in a Rural
Classification Zone.
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
p) Maximum Gross Floor Area 25% of the gross floor area of the
for Accessory Retail, principal use or 500.0 square metres
Showroom Area and gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
Tasting Room (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
q) Parking i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, any parking
structure must be located in the rear
yard;
iii) Notwithstanding i) above, where a lot
has frontage on Garner Road or
Glancaster Road or Twenty Road,
no parking shall be permitted within
the front yard or side yard.
r) Accessory Buildings i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law;
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, Section
9.11.3 c) ii) shall not apply.
9.11.4 SINGLE DETACHED, In addition to Subsection 4.12 c) and in
SEMI-DETACHED AND accordance with Subsection 34(10) of
DUPLEX DWELLINGS the Planning Act, R.S.O., 1990, c.P.13,
EXISTING AT THE DATE an addition or alteration to a single
May 10, 2019 9.11-6
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
OF PASSING OF THE BY- detached, semi-detached or duplex
LAW dwelling not permitted by the by-law but
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, existing at the date of passing of the
2018)
bylaw that increases the volume or size
of the interior of the building shall be
permitted as follows:
i) The increase shall not exceed a
maximum of 10% of the Gross Floor
Area of the building existing at the
date of passing of the by-law; and,
ii) The side yard setbacks of the
addition shall not be less than the
existing side yard setbacks.
(By-law No. 10-288, October 13, 2010 – OMB approval April 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
May 10, 2019 9.11-7



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 912  extractive industrial m12 zonepdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.12 EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIAL (M12) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Extractive Industrial (M12) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection
or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.12.1 PERMITTED USES Agriculture
Community Garden (By-law No. 21-189,
October 13, 2021)
Conservation
Mineral Aggregate Operation
Recreation, Passive
Secondary Uses to Agriculture
9.12.2 PROHIBITED USES A snow storage facility that is greater than
0.01 ha in size below the water table.
9.12.3 REGULATIONS
9.12.3.1 AGRICULTURE
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 40.4 hectares
b) Minimum Front Yard 15.0 metres
c) Minimum Side Yard 15.0 metres
d) Minimum Rear Yard 15.0 metres
e) Maximum Lot Coverage i) 20%;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, the
maximum lot coverage for
greenhouse operations shall be
70%.
f) Outdoor Storage i) Shall not be permitted in any Front
Yard or Flankage Yard;
ii) Shall be located a minimum of 20.0
metres from any lot line, and
screened by a visual barrier in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law;
9.12-1
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
iii) Sections i) and ii) above do not
apply to the storage or parking of
Agricultural vehicles or equipment.
g) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Sections 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Small Scale Retailing of i) The maximum gross floor area of all
Agricultural Products buildings and structures devoted to
retailing of agricultural products
grown primarily as part of the farm
operation, exclusive of a Farm
Produce/Product Stand, shall be
200.0 square metres;
ii) Shall not be permitted within a
Dwelling or a Farm Labour
Residence;
iii) In addition to Section 9.12.3.1 i) i),
the maximum gross floor area of a
Farm Produce/Product Stand shall
be 18.5 square metres;
iv) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
b), c) and d) and Section 4.8.2 a), a
Farm Produce/Product Stand shall
be permitted in any yard.
j) Farm Labour Residence A Farm Labour Residence, accessory to
Agriculture, may be permitted in
accordance with the following:
1. Shall have a maximum building
height of 10.5 metres.
2. All Farm Labour Residences shall
have an aggregate maximum lot
coverage of 420 square metres.
3. Individual Farm Labour Residence
units shall have a maximum gross
floor area of 200 square metres.
9.12-2
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
4. All Farm Labour Residences shall
be separated from the principal
Farm Dwelling by a minimum of 30
metres.
5. All Farm Labour Residences shall
be a separated by a minimum of 10
metres.
6. In addition to Section 5 of this By-
law, a minimum of 1 parking space
per Farm Labour Residence shall
be required in the absence of a
principal farm dwelling on the same
lot.
(By-law No. 24-039, March 27, 2024, not final &
binding)
k) Mushroom Operations i) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
b), c), and d) above, any buildings
or structures used for a Mushroom
Operation shall be setback a
minimum of 30.0 metres from any
lot line;
ii) No stockpiles of waste, manure,
fertilizers or compost shall be
permitted within 30.0 metres of any
lot line.
l) Nursery i) Retailing of horticultural products
and bulk product shall be in
accordance with Section 9.12.3.1 i);
ii) The outdoor storage of unenclosed
piles of bulk material shall not
exceed an aggregate area of 100.0
square metres.
m) Cannabis Growing and i) The maximum gross floor area for
Harvesting Facility all new buildings and structures
devoted to a Cannabis Growing and
Harvesting Facility shall not exceed
2,000.0 square metres;
9.12-3
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.12.3.1
m) i) above, existing buildings may
be used for a Cannabis Growing
and Harvesting Facility;
iii) The testing, packaging, and
shipping shall be accessory to the
cannabis growing and harvesting
facility;
iv) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 c),
any building, structure used for a
cannabis growing and harvesting
facility shall be setback a minimum
of 150 metres from:
1. Any portion of a lot line
abutting a Settlement
Residential (S1), Settlement
Commercial (S2) or Settlement
Institutional (S3) Zone; or,
2. Any residential dwelling unit
existing at the date of the
passing of the by-law, any
building used for farm labour
residence, mobile home,
educational establishment,
residential care facility, place
of worship, day care or park;
v) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
b), c) and d) above, all buildings or
structures associated with the use
shall be setback a minimum of 30.0
metres from any lot line;
vi) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1 f)
i), ii) and iii) above, outdoor storage
shall not be permitted;
vii) Retail sales shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 9.12.3.1 i).
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
9.12-4
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.12.3.2 SECONDARY USES TO In addition to Section 9.12.3 above, the
AGRICULTURE – following additional regulations shall
ADDITIONAL apply to Secondary Uses to Agriculture:
REGULATIONS
a) Uses Permitted as Agricultural Processing Establishment –
Secondary to Agriculture Secondary
Agricultural Research Operation
Agritourism
Home Industry
Kennel
Agricultural Brewery/Cidery/Winery
Landscape Contracting Establishment –
Secondary
b) Minimum Lot Area Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
a) and 4.12 d), Secondary Uses to
Agriculture shall have a minimum
lot area of 5.0 hectares.
c) Limitations on Use Notwithstanding Section 9.12.3.2
a), only one Home Industry or one
Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall be
permitted per lot.
d) Agricultural Processing i) The maximum gross floor area for
Establishment - all buildings and structures devoted
Secondary to an Agricultural Processing
Establishment - Secondary shall not
exceed 500.0 square metres;
ii) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
b), c), and d), all buildings or
structures associated with the
Agricultural Processing
Establishment – Secondary shall be
setback a minimum of 30.0 metres
from any lot line;
iii) Outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 9.12.3.1 f),
and shall not exceed an aggregate
area of 100.0 square metres.
9.12-5
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
e) Agritourism The maximum gross floor area of all
buildings or structures devoted to the
Agritourism use shall not exceed 500.0
square metres.
f) Home Industry i) All buildings or structures used as
part of the Home Industry shall be
setback a minimum of 15.0 metres
from any lot line, and shall occupy
no more than 250.0 square metres
of gross floor area;
ii) Shall be operated by a resident of
the property, with no more than 3
non-resident employees;
iii) Outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 9.12.3.1 f),
and shall not exceed an aggregate
area of 100.0 square metres;
iv) Notwithstanding Section 5.3 b), a
maximum of three Motor Vehicles
associated with the Home Industry
or Landscape Contracting
Establishment may be parked
unenclosed. Additional Motor
Vehicles associated with the use,
including all Motor Vehicles –
Commercial, must be parked in an
enclosed building. This regulation
does not apply to the storage or
parking of Agricultural vehicles and
equipment.
g) Kennel i) The maximum gross floor area for
all buildings and structures devoted
to a Kennel use shall be 500.0
square metres;
ii) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
b), c), and d), all buildings or
structures associated with a Kennel
shall be setback a minimum of 60.0
metres from any lot line;
9.12-6
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
iii) No domestic animals shall be
permitted to be kept in any open
area within 60.0 metres of any lot
line.
h) Agricultural i) Notwithstanding Sections 9.12.3.1
Brewery/Cidery/Winery a), 9.12.3.2 b), and 4.12 d), an
Agricultural Brewery/Cidery/Winery
shall only be permitted on a lot with
a minimum area of 4.0 hectares, of
which a minimum of 2.0 hectares
shall be used for the growing
production of grapes, fruits, hops or
other produce directly associated
with on-site beer, cider or wine
production;
ii) The maximum building area
devoted to an Agricultural
Brewery/Cidery/ Winery use shall
be 500.0 square metres of gross
floor area exclusive of the
basement or cellar, of which a
maximum of 25% of the gross floor
area may be used for Retail and/or
hospitality/tasting purposes.
i) Landscape Contracting i) Notwithstanding Section 9.12.3.2
Establishment – a), a Landscape Contracting
Secondary Establishment – Secondary shall
only be permitted as a use
Secondary to a Nursery;
ii) In addition to Section 9.12.3.2 b),
1. On lots with a lot area of 7.0
hectares or greater, a minimum
of 65 percent of the lot area
zoned Agriculture (A1), Rural
(A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) shall be used for the
growing of plants, shrubs, trees
or similar vegetation as part of
the Nursery operation, and may
include the growing of other
Agricultural products. In no
9.12-7
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
case shall the portion of the lot
zoned Agriculture (A1), Rural
(A2) and/or
Conservation/Hazard Land –
Rural (P6) which is used for the
growing of plants, shrubs, trees
or similar vegetation as part of
the Nursery operation be less
than 3.0 hectares in area.
2. On lots with a lot area less than
7.0 hectares, a minimum of 50
percent of the lot area zoned
Agriculture (A1), Rural (A2)
and/or Conservation/Hazard
Land – Rural (P6) shall be used
for the growing of plants,
shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation as part of the
Nursery operation. In no case
shall the portion of the lot zoned
Agriculture (A1), Rural (A2)
and/or Conservation/Hazard
Land – Rural (P6) which is used
for the growing of plants,
shrubs, trees or similar
vegetation as part of the
Nursery operation be less than
3.0 hectares in area.
iii) All buildings or structures used as
part of the Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall be
setback a minimum of 15.0 metres
from any lot line, and the total gross
floor area of all buildings or
structures used as part of the
Landscape Contracting
Establishment – Secondary shall
not exceed 250.0 square metres;
iv) Notwithstanding Section 9.12.3.1 f),
outdoor storage of goods, materials
or equipment shall not exceed an
aggregate area of 100.0 square
metres, and shall be setback a
minimum of 30 metres from any lot
9.12-8
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
line and screened by a visual
barrier in accordance with Section
4.19 of this By-law;
v) In addition to Section 5.3 b) a
maximum of three Motor Vehicles
associated with the Landscape
Contracting Establishment -
Secondary may be parked
unenclosed. Additional Motor
Vehicles associated with the use,
including all Motor Vehicles –
Commercial, must be parked in an
enclosed building. This regulation
does not apply to the storage or
parking of Agricultural vehicles or
equipment or parking of employee
Motor Vehicles.
vi) Notwithstanding v) above all
unenclosed parking areas
associated with the Landscape
Contracting Establishment –
Secondary use shall be screened
by a visual barrier in accordance
with Section 4.19 of this by-law.
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015, As amended
by OMB Decision PL151130 dated March 13,
2017)
9.12.3.4 MINERAL AGGREGATE
OPERATION
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Setback for i) 30.0 metres from any portion of a
Excavation property lot line abutting a
Settlement Residential (S1) Zone;
ii) 30.0 metres from any portion of a
property lot line abutting a property
which contains a residential use;
iii) 30.0 metres from a street line;
iv) 15.0 metres from all other property
lot lines, but shall not be required
adjacent to lands zoned Extractive
Industrial (M12) Zone.
9.12-9
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
b) Minimum Setback for i) 90.0 metres from any portion of a
buildings or structures, property lot line abutting a
including processing Settlement Residential (S1) Zone;
plants
ii) 90.0 metres from any portion of a
property lot line abutting a property
which contains a residential use;
iii) 30.0 metres from all other property
lot lines, but shall not be required
adjacent to lands zoned Extractive
Industrial (M12) Zone.
c) Restriction on Location of i) Shall not be located within 90.0
Stockpiles of Aggregate, metres of a lot line abutting a
Topsoil, or Overburden Settlement Residential (S1) Zone or
containing a residential use;
ii) Shall not be located within 30.0
metres of all other lot lines, except
where adjacent to lands zoned
Extractive Industrial (M12) Zone.
d) Landscape and Fencing i) A minimum 1.2 metre high fence
Requirements shall be provided and maintained
around the licensed boundary of a
Mineral Aggregate Operation, but
shall not be required adjacent to
lands zoned Extractive Industrial
(M12) Zone;
ii) A Planting Strip having a minimum
width of 6.0 metres shall be
provided and maintained adjacent
to a street line and to any lot line
abutting a Settlement Residential
S1) Zone or containing a
residential use, and may include a
berm or fence.
e) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.8 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-070, May 12, 2021)
f) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
9.12-10
May 12, 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 15-173, July 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
9.12.3.5 COMMUNITY GARDEN In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.27 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
9.12-11
May 12, 2021



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 96  light industrial m6 zonepdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.6 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M6) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Industrial (M6) Zone for any purpose other than one or
more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or use shall
also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.6.1 PERMITTED USES Alcohol Production Facility (By-law No. 18-219,
August 17, 2018)
Aquaponics (By-law No. 14-163, June 25, 2014)
Artist Studio (By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting Facility
(By-law No. 14-163, June 25, 2014)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial Parking Facility
Communications Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Contractor’s Establishment
Courier Establishment
Craftsperson Shop (By-law No. 17-220, October
25, 2017)
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Financial Establishment
Greenhouse (By-law No. 14-163, June 25, 2014)
Hotel
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Medical Clinic
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
Office
Personal Services
Private Power Generation Facility
Production Studio (By-law No. 17-220, October
25, 2017)
Repair Service
May 10, 2019 9.6-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Research and Development
Establishment
Restaurant
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson’s Shop
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
Warehouse
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
(By-law No. 17-220, October 25, 2017)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
9.6.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.6.1, the
following types of manufacturing uses
are prohibited, even as an accessory
use:
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur Products
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, Plastic, Asphalt
or Cement, not including mixing,
blending, treatment or similar
process
Processing or Refining of Petroleum
or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of Meat,
Poultry or Fish or by-products
thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.6.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even as
accessory uses:
May 10, 2019 9.6-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
Day Nursery
Dry Cleaning Plant
Dwelling Unit
Place of Worship
9.6.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
b) Minimum Lot Width 45.0 metres
c) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres
Street
d) Minimum Yard Abutting a 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
Residential Zone or an lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Institutional Zone Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone.
e) Maximum Building Height i) 11.0 metres;
Abutting a Residential Zone
or an Institutional Zone
ii) In addition to i) above, maximum
building height may be equivalently
increased as yard increases beyond
minimum yard requirement
established in 9.6.3 d) above.
f) Location Restriction of Any building or structure used for
Manufacturing Uses Manufacturing shall be setback a
minimum 20.0 metres from any portion of
a property lot line abutting a property lot
line within a Residential Zone or an
Institutional Zone.
g) Restriction of Outdoor Any outdoor training facilities shall be
Training Facilities prohibited.
associated with a Trade
School
h) Maximum Combined Gross Shall be limited to a combined total of
Floor Area for Medical Clinic 3,000 square metres gross floor area on a
lot.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
May 10, 2019 9.6-3
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
i) Gross Floor Area for Office Maximum gross floor area for Office use
Use within an individual building, excluding
accessory office, shall be limited to 3,000
square metres.
j) Maximum Gross Floor Area An Industrial Administrative Office or a
for Industrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
k) Landscaped Area and i) Minimum 3.0 metre wide Landscaped
i
Planting Strip Requirements Area shall be provided and
maintained abutting a street, except
for points of ingress and egress;
ii) Where a property lot line abuts a
property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
Strip shall be provided and
maintained.
l) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a property lot line
within a Residential Zone or an
Institutional Zone, in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this By-law.
m) Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall be
Outdoor Assembly permitted in conjunction with a building
and the following regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in a
required yard abutting a street;
i) In addition to i) above, Outdoor
Storage and Outdoor Assembly shall
not be permitted in a Front Yard or a
Flankage Yard along Barton
Street/Barton Street East;
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
May 10, 2019 9.6-4
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
the total lot area;
iv) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be set back a
minimum of 20.0 metres from any
portion of a property lot line abutting
a property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, and
shall be screened by a Visual Barrier
in accordance with Section 4.19 of
this By-law;
v) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this By-law.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
n) Location and Size of Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
Outdoor Display equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and the following
regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Display shall be permitted in
a yard abutting a street, but shall be
no closer than 3.0 metres to the lot
line;
ii) In addition to i) above, the area
devoted to Outdoor Display shall be
limited to a combined maximum of
25% the landscaped Area required by
Section 9.6.3 k) i) above.
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
o) Maximum Combined Gross i) 25% of the gross floor area of the
Floor Area for Accessory principal use or 500.0 square metres
Retail, Showroom Area and gross floor area, whichever is the
Tasting Room lesser; and,
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, retail or
accessory retail associated with a
motor vehicle service station shall be
limited to a maximum gross floor area
of 280 square metres.
May 10, 2019 9.6-5
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
(By-law No. 11-276, November 16, 2011)
p) Maximum Gross Floor Area 5,000 square metres
for an Alcohol Production (By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
Facility
q) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
r) Accessory Buildings i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8.
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
ii) In addition to i) above, no accessory
building shall be permitted within a
front yard or a flankage yard.
(By-law No. 12-132, June 13, 2012)
s) Additional Regulations for In addition to the regulations of Section
Cannabis Growing and 9.6.3, the following additional regulations
Harvesting Facility shall apply:
i) Notwithstanding Section 9.6.3 m) and
n), no outdoor storage, outdoor
assembly, or outside displays shall be
permitted.
ii) Retail sales shall be permitted in
accordance with Section 9.6.3 o)
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
iii) Notwithstanding Section 4.12 c), any
building or structure used for a
Cannabis Growing and Harvesting
Facility shall be setback a minimum
of 150 metres from any portion of a
lot line abutting a Residential,
Institutional or Commercial and Mixed
Use Zone.
(By-law No. 14-163, June 25, 2014)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
(By-law No. 10-128, May 26, 2010)
(By-law No. 12-132, June 13, 2012)
(By-law No. 14-163, June 25, 2014)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
(By-law No. 18-266, September 12, 2018)
May 10, 2019 9.6-6



Content from 05200 zoning bylaw section 98  airport related business m8 zonepdf:
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.8 AIRPORT RELATED BUSINESS (M8) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Related Business (M8) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.8.1 PERMITTED USES Catering Service
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial Parking Facility
Conference or Convention Centre
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Financial Establishment
Hotel
Labour Association Hall
Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Dealership (By-law No. 22-084,
April 13, 2022)
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
Personal Services
Restaurant
Retail
Transportation Depot
Trade School
9.8.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.8.1,
Outdoor Storage is prohibited, even
as an accessory use.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.8.1, an
Agricultural Greenhouse only as an
accessory use to another permitted
use.
iii) The following use is prohibited,
except as an accessory use to
another permitted use:
Commercial Recreation, restricted
to a Fitness Centre
Personal Service
September 21, 2018 9.8-1
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
9.8.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres ;
b) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres;
Street
c) Minimum Yard Abutting a 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
Residential Zone or a lot line abutting a property lot line within
Rural Zone a Residential Zone.
d) Maximum Building Height i) In accordance with the regulations
of Section 4.17 of this By-law.
ii) 11.0 metres; but shall not exceed
the maximum building height
established by i) above.
ii) The maximum building height may
be equivalently increased as yard
increases beyond minimum yard
requirement established in 9.8.3 c)
above, but shall not exceed the
maximum building height
established by i) above.
e) Maximum Gross Floor 500 square metres;
Area for Convenience
Store, Personal Service
and Fitness Centre
f) Built form for New The minimum length of the ground floor
Development façade shall be equal to 60% or more of
the measurement of the front lot line.
g) Landscaped Area i) Minimum 6.0 metre width shall be
provided and maintained abutting
a street, except for points of
ingress and egress and shall not
include outdoor display;
ii) Where a lot line abuts a property lot
line within a Residential Zone or an
Institutional Zone, a minimum 3.0
metre wide Planning Strip shall be
September 21, 2018 9.8-2
THE CITY OF HAMILTON
SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
ZONING BY-LAW
provided and maintained.
h) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a Residential
Zone, in accordance with Section 4.19 of
this By-law.
i) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
j) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.8 of this By-law;
(By-law No. 21-189, October 13, 2021)
(By-law No. 10-288, October 13, 2010 – OMB approval April 10, 2015)
(By-law No. 18-219, August 17, 2018)
September 21, 2018 9.8-3



Content from 05339 to amend fireworks bylaw no 02285pdf:
Authority: Item 6, Community Services
Report 05-01 1
CM: November 17,2005
Bill No. 339
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-339
To Amend Fireworks Bylaw No. 02-285, as amended, to temporarily Provide an
Extended Sale Period
WHEREAS Council desires to amend By-law No. 02-285, as amended, respecting
fireworks to provide on a trial basis a fourteen day sale period prior to holidays in place
of the current seven day period, and which trial period will expire on July 2, 2006;
AND WHEREAS Section 121 of the Municipal Act, S. 0. 2001, Chapter 25 provides
that a municipality may regulate or prohibit the sale of fireworks;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 5.3 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 02-285, as amended, is hereby
amended to replace the word “seven” with the word “fourteen”.
2. This by-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment, and is further repealed on July 2, 2006.
PASSED and ENACTED this 17‘h day of November, 2005.



Content from 05376 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw 03272pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 05-026 (FCSO512 4/PW05143)
CM: December 14,2005
Bill No. 376
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-376
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2006
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003 the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control:
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2005, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 05-026 and did
authorize the 2006 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2006 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “B” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2006.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged for 2006.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 14'h day of December, 2005.
5
y C erk
3
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $10 4.55 F,JS applica e
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $313 .65 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and Full Cost
Recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $418.20 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = /A - D) x 10 0
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005)
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
4
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water; and for 2006 is $0.851 per cubic meter of
water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: GxF%=H
Step 6: HxI=$J



Content from 05378 to amend the sewer use bylaw 04150pdf:
i
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 05-026 (FCSO5124/PWO5143)
CM: December 14,2005
Bill No. 378
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-378
TO AMEND THE SEWER USE BY-LAW 04-150, AS AMENDED,
AND IMPLEMENT THE 2006 SEWER USE FEES AND CHARGES.
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and enacted
By-law 04-150, known and referred to as the “Sewer Use By-law”, which By-law came
into force and effect on June 30, 2004.
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the MuniciDal Act, 2001 , S.O. 2001 , c.25, as
amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on any class of
persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of the municipality and
for the use of the municipality’s property, including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2005, the Council of the City of Hamilton
did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 05-026 and did authorize the
2006 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including the sewer use fees and
charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2006 sewer use fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers adequate
and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said MuniciDal Act, 2001;.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “D” to By-law No. 04-150, as amended, be repealed and that
Schedule “D” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1, 2006.
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 04-150, as amended, including but
not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby confirmed as
unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 14th day of December, 2005.
3333311A3 rVNlfVltA CsI' 1009
)U333ltlt3lC 10 IN S33110NS P' 1 VNa 8(
)9( d\uunp jaa daw !)) 0p!s3ye~6a yenla psa~e6a $GZ'Z8+

I
5
5. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $244.28 plus GST
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $244.28 plus GST
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $244.28 plus GST
6. Information Requests $1 12.35 plus GST



Content from 05379 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 05-026 (FCSO512 4/PW05143)
CM: December 14,2005
Bill No. 379
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 05-379
TO AMEND THE WATERWORKS BY-LAW R84-026, AS AMENDED,
AND IMPLEMENT THE 2006 WATER FEES AND CHARGES
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by-
law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the Citv of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworthf or all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the Citv of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control:
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2005, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 05-026 and did
authorize the 2006 water and wastewater user fees and charges, including but
not limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2006 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001 ;
2
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That sub-section l(f) of By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed
and the following substituted therefor:
“General Manager of Public Works” means the General Manager of Public
Works for the City of Hamilton, or the person duly authorized to act in his
or her stead, or successor;
2. That By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be further amended by striking
out every reference therein to “General Manager of Transportation,
Operations and Environment” and by substituting in each case “General
Manager of Public Works”.
3. That Schedule “At o By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “A” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
4. That Schedule “C” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “C” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
5. That Schedule “E” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “E” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
6. That Schedule “G”to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “G” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
7. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of the 1‘‘ day of
January, 2006.
8. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 14 th day of December, 2005.
3
SCHEDULE “A”
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2006
Water: City of Hamilton
$310 .62 per annum
Note: Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Rate is 100% of non-metered
water rate for a combined total rate of $621.23 per annum.
4
SCHEDULE "C"
MISCELLANEOUS RATES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2006
(Referred to in Section 12(6), (7) and (8))
1. Travellinq Shows and Other TemDorarv Occasions
The deposit required from travelling shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Thousand, Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($5,250.00), and
consists of:
(a) Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) as a usage deposit (to be
applied to the cost of temporary connection/disconnection, the per
diem rental cost for the hydrant adapter and the amount due for water
used); and
(b) Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) as a damage deposit (refundable
upon return to the City of the hydrant adapter, less any damages
incurred).
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 12 of Schedule "E" to this By-
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
2. Public Water Filling Stations
(a) The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water
Filling Stations be $1.277 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public
Water Filling Stations are located at:
(i) Cormorant Road, Ancaster
(ii) Dartnall Road, Hamilton.
(b) Water Haulage License Fee $147.18
3. Private Water Filling Stations
The one time permit fee for new private water filling stations approved by the
General Manager of Public Works is $959.36 and is payable upon permit
a pp li cat ion.
5
The annual permit fee for both existing private water filling stations and new
private water filling stations approved by the General Manager of Public
Works is $257.41 and is payable within one month of the notification by the
City.
4. Areas Outside the Citv of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G"to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
6
S C HE D UL E "E
"
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2006
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $58.03
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in Section 4( 1) ( b) of By-law R84-026,
as amended:
I
Size of Water Meter Fee
I
16 mm diameter $287.72
1
20 mm diameter $328.26
I
25 mm diameter $537.59
I
38 mm diameter $824.56
50 mm diameter $998.65
100 mm diameter (turbine) $2,460.62
100 mm diameter (compound) $4,249.37
100 mm diameter (fire service compound) $1 0,540.44
150 mm diameter (turbine) $4,271.87
150 mm diameter (compound) $8,435.94
150 mm diameter (fire service compound) $13 ,460.87
200 mm diameter (turbine) $6,169.37
200 mm diameter (fire service compound) $1 8,377.1 2
250 mm diameter and above cost+ 33%
Overh ead
7
2. (a) Permit refund service charge - water * $24.54
(b) Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 33% Overhead
3. For superintending the laying of a new water service
(a) Regular Inspection - during normal working hours $55.09
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $55.09
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
(c) Regular Inspection - after normal working hours $82.64
4. Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee:**
(a) Service replacement of public portion from Omm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $230.70
(b) Inspection of private portion of service replacement from
Omm to and including 20mm $17 1.91
5. For turning water off $55.09
6. For turning water on $55.09
7. For turning water on & off during the same call $82.64
8. For each Special Water Service to be connected as
referred to in Section 4(18) of this By-law $2,663.31
9. Discharge of Special Water Service Agreements $314 .68
10. Processing of Special Water Service Agreements $444.1 8
11. Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes $82.64
12. For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):***
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnection fee
(a) Connection/Disconnection Fee - normal working hours $159.19/visit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee - after normal working hours $238.78/visit
(c) Additional per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental $1O .OO/day
8
13. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter:
Size of Meter cost 8% PST& Total
7% GST
16 mm diameter $ 112.80 $ 16.92 $ 129.72
I I I
20 mm diameter $ 166.72 $ 25.01 $ 191.73
~~ ~
25 mm diameter $ 206.79 $ 31.02 $ 237.81
38 mm diameter $ 461.24 $ 69.19 $ 530.43
50 mm diameter $ 615.59 $ 92.34 $ 707.93
100 mm diameter (turbine) $ 1,911.88 $ 286.78 $ 2,198.66
100 mm diameter $3,456.67 $ 518.50 $ 3,975.17
(compound)
101 mm diameter (fire $9,034.76 $ 1,355.21 $ 10,389.97
service compound)
150 mm diameter (turbine) $ 3,517.85 $ 527.68 $ 4,045.53
I I
150 mm diameter $7,168.77 $ 1,075.32 $ 8,244.09
(compound)
I I
150 mm diameter (fire $1 1,624.20 $1,743.63 $ 13,367.83
service compound)
I I I
200 mm diameter (turbine) $ 5,200.30 $ 780.05 $ 5,980.35
200 mm diameter (fire 18,380.77
service compound)
-
>250 mm diameter (all cost + 33% cost + 33%
types) overhead overhead plus
PST and GST
14. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
I
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $93.25
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $142.45
100 mm plus diameter $32 5.95
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) cost +33%
overhead
9
15. For service calls other than previously specified:
(a) Service Call - during normal working hours $55.09
(b) Service Call - after normal working hours $82.64
16. Meter Open By-pass $325.00
17. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
18. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge cost plus 33%
overhead
19. Processing of Landscaping Lease Arrangements $412 .94
20. Rental Rate for Landscaping Lease (Per Annum) Case Dependent
No set fee
21. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - No Field Inspection $73.91
22. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - Field Inspection $202.91
23. General Administration Fees
Replacement of lost cards for water filling stations $40.00
Account Review $73.91
General Request (per hour) $36.96
*
A service charge applies for each refund issued.
**
Additional fees will apply for service size upgrades based on size and length
***
This service requires a $5250.00 deposit ($250.00 usage deposit and
$5000.00 damage deposit)
10
SCHEDULE "G"
TABLE OF METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2006
(Referred to in Section 12(2), (3) & (4) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Charge
The minimum charge per billing period, which constitutes a basic charge,
including the use of the specified volume of water is as follows:
Minimum
Residential Approved Volume/ Approved Minimum
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Rate Bi-Monthly Monthly Rate Volume/Month
15 mm to 20
mm $12 .22 10 m3 $6.1 1 5 m3
16 mm $12 .22 10 m3 $6.1 1 5 m3
20 mm $12 .22 10 m3 $6.1 1 5 m3
25 mm $64.58 30 m3 $32.29 15 m3
38 mm $71.74 30 m3 $35.87 15 m3
50 mm $85.32 30 m3 $42.66 15 m3
75 mm $14 7.80 30 m3 $73.90 15 m3
100 mm $1 89.32 30 m3 $94.66 15 m3
150 mm $335.00 30 m3 $1 67.50 15 m3
200 mm $578.42 30 m3 $289.2 1 15 m3
250 mm $890.48 30 m3 $445.24 15 m3
100 mm $283.98 30 m3 $14 1.99 15 m3
150 mm $502.50 30 m3 $251.25 15 m3
I I I I
200mm $867.62 30m3 $433.81 15 m3
11
B) Consumption Rate
specified volume
lndudd in Billed
Mnirmm charge Llsage(=hargePerCUbiCMetrt?
Residential 10 m3 $0.851 > 10 m3
small conrnercial 10 m3 $0.851 > 1om3
cofimercial/ Industrial am3 $0.851 > 30m3
Haldimand Norfolk & Water l-hulers 30m3 $1.2?7> 30 m3
C) SANITARY SEWER SURCHARGE RATE IS 100% OF WATER
CONSUMPTION (applies to all metered residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional water consumption).



Content from 06026 sewer and drain bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 3, Public Works, Infrastructure
and Environment Committee
Report 06-002 (PW06022)
CM: February 15,2006
Bill No. 026
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-026
Being a Bylaw to Regulate the Installation, Connection and Use of Sewers and
Drains in the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS Sections 9(3) and 1l (1) of the Municipal Act, 2001 , S.O. 2001 , c. 25, as
amended (“Municipal Act. 2001 ”), provide that a single-tier municipality may pass by-
laws to regulate a public utility which includes a system for the provision of storm and
sanitary sewage services;
AND WHEREAS, the Citv of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14, as amended,
designates the City of Hamilton as a single-tier municipality for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS Section 8 of the Municipal Act, 2001, provides that a municipality has
the capacity, rights, powers and privileges of a natural person for the purpose of
exercising its authority under the Municipal Act, 2001 ;
AND WHEREAS sanitary, storm and combined sewers and drains have been
previously regulated by by-laws enacted by the councils of the former municipalities
known as The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, The Corporation of the
Town of Ancaster, The Corporation of the Town of Dundas, The Corporation of the
Town of Flamborough, The Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook, The Corporation
of the City of Hamilton and The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting of March 23, 2005, the Council of the City of Hamilton
did approve Item 5 of Public Works, Infrastructure and Environment Committee Report
05-005 and did thereby also approve a new sewer lateral management policy which is
to be reflected in this By-law;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting of November 23, 2005, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Motion 7.4 and did thereby extend the implementation date for
the new sewer lateral management policy to March 1 , 2006;
AND WHEREAS Section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001 provides that a municipality
may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services done by or on behalf of a
municipality;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has provided notice of such fees and charges in
accordance with the Municipal Act, 2001 and its regulations thereunder, and otherwise
in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers adequate;
2 Sewer and Drain By-law
AND WHEREAS it is therefore desirable to consolidate the provisions respecting the
installation, connection and use of sanitary, storm and combined sewers and drains
within the City of Hamilton into a single by-law;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. In this By-law, unless the context otherwise requires, the expression:
"Branch Connection" means any and all private Sewers connected to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and any appurtenances thereof;
"Building Drain" means
(i) that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system in or
adjacent to a building and which receives the discharge from a soil
pipe, or waste pipe, or other drainage pipe, and conveys it to the
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion, and
(ii) wherever used in this By-law, both a Sanitary Building Drain and a
Stormwater Building Drain;
"Catchbasin" means a chamber installed to collect surface water from an
open area and to trap solids, and any appurtenances thereof;
"City" means the City of Hamilton or its designated representative;
"City Solicitor" means the City Solicitor for the City of Hamilton or the person
duly authorized or designated to act in his or her stead, or successor;
iiCity Tree" means a tree located on a City road allowance or on City
property;
"Combined Main Sewer" means a Main Sewer intended to function
simultaneously as a Storm Sewer and as a Sanitary Sewer;
"Council" means the Council of the City of Hamilton;
"Defect" means a condition in a Sewer Lateral that is determined by the
General Manager of Public Works to result in a Sewer Lateral that is
structurally flawed or operationally substandard, and may include, but is not
limited to the following: a collapse, misaligned joint, slope problem, sag, dip,
3 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
damage resulting from the discharge of materials not intended for Sewer
disposal and damage resulting from nearby construction;
"Domestic Sewage" means the water carried wastes produced from non-
commercial or non-industrial activities and which result from normal human
living processes. Without limiting any of the foregoing, Domestic Sewage
also includes contaminated water from cooling or condensing systems and
air-conditioning systems from non-commercial or non-industrial activities;
"Foundation Drain" means a perforated groundwater collection system
located at the footing of a building and designed for the purpose of
protecting the building;
"General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services" means the General
Manager of Finance and Corporate Services for the City of Hamilton or the
person duly authorized or designated to act in his or her stead, or
successor;
"General Manager of Planning and Economic Development" means the
General Manager of Planning and Economic Development for the City of
Hamilton or the person duly authorized or designated to act in his or her
stead, or successor;
"General Manager of Public Works" means the General Manager of Public
Works for the City of Hamilton or the person duly authorized or designated
to act in his or her stead, or successor;
"Industrial Sewage means all water carried wastes of the City excluding
I'
Domestic Sewage and Uncontaminated Water, and shall include all sewage
from any producing, manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial,
agricultural or other operation where the sewage discharged includes
significant quantities of wastes of non-human origin. Without limiting any of
the foregoing, Industrial Sewage also includes contaminated water from
cooling or condensing systems and air-conditioning systems from any of the
foregoing operations;
"Inspector" means a person authorized by the General Manager of Public
Works to inspect Sewage and/or Stormwater generation, conveyance,
processing and disposal facilities;
"Joined Sanitary-Foundation Drain Sewer Lateral" means a Sewer for the
collection and transmission of Domestic Sewage and groundwater from a
Foundation Drain to a Main Sewer;
-
"Joined Sanitary-Foundation Drain Sewer Lateral Private Portion" means
-
a Sewer Lateral Private Portion which is to conduct Domestic Sewage
4 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
and groundwater from a Foundation Drain to a Joined Sanitary-Foundation
-
Drain Sewer Lateral Public Portion;
-
“Joined Sanitary-Foundation Drain Sewer Lateral Public Portion” means a
Sewer Lateral - Public Portion which is to conduct Sewage and
groundwater from a Joined Sanitary -Foundation Drain Sewer Lateral -
Private Portion to a Main Sewer;
“Joint Use Agreement” means an agreement between the City and the
registered owners of parcels of land which is entered into in the
circumstances described in section 5 of this By-law, and for clarification,
also includes an agreement known as a joint service agreement and an
agreement known as a common private drain agreement;
“Lateral Connection” means any and all junctions, saddles or other
-
appurtenances required to join a Sewer Lateral Public Portion to a Main
Sewer;
“Line of the Highway” means the property line that distinguishes the public
road allowance from any other parcel of land.
“Main Sewer” means any Sewer, other than a Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion or Sewer Lateral - Private Portion, which is owned, operated,
maintained or controlled by the City and to which a Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion is connected;
“Municipal Law Enforcement Officer” means any person appointed by
Council for the enforcement of this By-law or any other by-law;
“Occupant” means any person over the age of 18 years in possession of
property, lands or building which is subject to this By-law;
“Owner” includes:
(0 registered owner(s) of the property, lands or building which is subject
to this By-law;
(ii) both the owner in trust and the beneficial owner of property, lands or
building which is subject to this By-law;
(iii) the person for the time being managing or receiving the rent of the
property, lands or building, which is subject to this By-law, in
connection with which the word is used, whether on the person’s
own account or as agent or trustee of any other person or who would
receive the rent if the property, lands or building was let; and
5 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(iv) a lessee or occupant of the property, lands or building who manages
or controls the condition of the property, lands or building, which is
subject to this By-law;
(aa) "Sanitary Building Drain" means a Building Drain that conducts Domestic
Sewage and Industrial Sewage or either of them and connects to a Sanitary
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion;
(bb) "Sanitary Sewer" means a Main Sewer for the collection and transmission
of Sewage;
(cc) "Sanitary Sewer Lateral" means both the Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private
Portion and the Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion;
(dd) "Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion" means a pipe that is connected
to a Sanitary Building Drain 1000 mm outside the wall of a building and that
-
conducts Sewage to the Sanitary Sewer Lateral Public Portion;
- -
(ee) "Sanitary Sewer Lateral Public Portion" means a Sewer Lateral Public
Portion that conducts Sewage from a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private
Portion to a Main Sewer;
(ff) "Sewage" means Domestic Sewage and Industrial Sewage, or either of
them;
(gg) "Sewage Treatment Plant" means any arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating Sewage;
(hh) "Sewage Works" means all Sewers, sewer systems, pumping stations,
Sewage Treatment Plants and other works for the collection, acceptance,
transmission, treatment and disposal of Sewage and Stormwater;
(ii) "Sewer" shall mean a pipe or conduit for carrying Sewage and Stormwater,
or either of them;
(jj) "Sewer Lateral" means both the Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and the
Sewer Lateral - Public Portion;
(kk) "Sewer Lateral - Private Portion":
(i) means that part of a drainage system outside a building commencing
at a point 1000 mm outside the wall of a building and connecting the
Building Drain to a Sewer Lateral - Public Portion or to any other
place of disposal, and
6 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(ii) includes that part of a drainage system between a Catchbasin and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion or other place of disposal, and
-
(iii) means, wherever used in this By-law both a Sanitary Sewer Lateral
-
Private Portion and a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion;
(11) "Sewer Lateral - Public Portion" means:
-
(i) that part of a drainage system which connects a Sewer Lateral
Private Portion to a Main Sewer, and
(ii) wherever used in this By-law, both a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion and a Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion;
(mm) "Special Service Agreement" means an agreement between the City and
the registered owner of a parcel of land which is entered into in the
circumstances described in sub-section 4(1) of this By-law and for
clarification, also includes an agreement known as a special sewer
agreement;
(nn) "Stormwater" means rain, ground or surface water, drainage from land,
water from the melting of snow or ice, and Uncontaminated Water;
(00) "Storm Sewer":
(i) means a Main Sewer that conveys Stormwater, but
(ii) does not mean a Sanitary Sewer that conducts Sewage;
(pp) "Stomwater Building Drain":
(i) means a Building Drain that conveys Stormwater to a Storm Sewer
-
Lateral Private Portion; but
(ii) does not mean a Building Drain that conducts Sewage;
(qq) "Storm Sewer Lateral" means the Storm Sewer Lateral -Private Portion and
the Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion;
(rr) "Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion":
(i) means a Sewer that conveys Stormwater to a Storm Sewer Lateral -
Public Portion and that commences 1000 mm from outside the wall
of a building, but
7 Sewer and Drain By-law
-
(ii) does not mean a Sewer Lateral Private Portion that conveys
Sewage;
(ss) "Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion":
-
(i) means a Sewer Lateral Public Portion that conveys Stormwater
-
from a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion to a Storm Sewer, but
(ii) does not mean a Sewer Lateral - Public Portion that conveys
Sewage;
(tt) "Uncontaminated Water" means water to which no matter has been added
as a consequence of its use, or to modify its use, by any person.
INTERPRETATION AND APPLICATION OF BY-LAW
2. (1) In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this By-law and the
provisions of any other statute, regulation or by-law in force in the City of
Hamilton, the provisions that are the most restrictive prevail, except to the
extent the statute or regulation states that it, any provision thereof, or any
by-law passed thereunder, supercedes this By-law or a provision of this
.
By- Ia w
(2) The necessary grammatical changes required to make the provisions of
this By-law applicable to corporations, partnerships, trusts, and
individuals, male or female, and to include the singular or plural meaning
where the context so requires, shall in all cases be assumed as though
fully expressed.
(3) The insertion of headings and the division of this By-law into sections and
subsections are for convenience of reference only and shall not affect the
interpretation thereof.
(4) Any references in this By-law to any statutes, regulations or by-laws shall
be deemed to be a reference to such statutes, regulations or by-laws, as
amended, restated or replaced from time to time.
(5) Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare a part or whole of any
provision of this By-law to be invalid or of no force and effect, the provision
or part is deemed severable from this By-law, and it is the intention of
Council that the remainder survive and be applied and enforced in
accordance with its terms to the extent possible under the law.
8 Sewer and Drain By-law
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
The General Manager of Public Works and the General Manager of
Planning and Economic Development are responsible for the administration
of this By-Law in all areas where the City has jurisdiction and control over
Sewage Works.
All Municipal Law Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce this By-
law.
Where the General Manager of Public Works is responsible for the
administration of a provision of this By-law, the General Manager of Public
Works is authorized to delegate the responsibility for the administration of
that provision to any employee or agent of the Public Works Department of
the City.
Where the General Manager of Planning and Economic Development is
responsible for the administration of a provision of this By-law, the General
Manager of Planning and Economic Development is authorized to delegate
the responsibility for the administration of that provision to any employee or
agent of the Planning and Economic Development Department of the City.
CONNECTION WHERE LAND NOT DIRECTLY SERVICED
Where a parcel of land does not abut on a highway or other public
communication in which there is a Main Sewer to which such land may
readily be drained, but there is some other Main Sewer to which the land
may be readily drained and for the cost of which such parcel of land has not
been specially assessed, such parcel of land may be drained to such other
Main Sewer,
upon the registered owner of the parcel of land receiving the prior
written consent of the City, in the City’s sole discretion, and
upon the payment to the City of the fee set forth in the applicable
City by-law, and
upon the execution and registration on title of a Special Service
Agreement, with content acceptable to the General Manager of
Planning and Economic Development and in a form satisfactory to
the City Solicitor.
9 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
-
SEWER LATERALS PRIVATE PORTION AND PUBLIC PORTION
5. (1) After the date of the enactment of this By-Law,
-
(a) no person is to install any Sewer Lateral Private Portion for the
carriage of both Sewage and Stormwater, but every person installing
a Sewer Lateral - Private Portion is responsible,
(i) where a Sanitary Sewer is available, that a Sanitary Sewer
-
Lateral Private Portion is installed and connected to a
-
Sanitary Sewer Lateral Public Portion, and
(ii) where a Storm Sewer is available, that a Storm Sewer Lateral
-
Private Portion is installed and connected to a Storm Sewer
Lateral - Public Portion, but
notwithstanding the provisions of this clause (a), where a Sewer
Lateral - Public Portion meeting the requirements of sub-section
8(11) exists, a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and a
separate Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion are to be installed.
(b) no person is to install any Sewer Lateral - Public Portion for the
carriage of both Sewage and Stormwater, but every person installing
a Sewer Lateral - Public Portion is responsible,
(i) where a Sanitary Sewer is available, that a Sanitary Sewer
Lateral - Public Portion is installed and connected to the
Sanitary Sewer, and
(ii) where a Storm Sewer is available, that a Storm Sewer Lateral
- Public Portion is installed and connected to the Storm
Sewer, but
notwithstanding the provisions of this clause (b), where only a
-
Combined Main Sewer is available, a Sanitary Sewer Lateral
-
Public Portion and a separate Storm Sewer Lateral Public Portion
are to be installed provided that the Storm Sewer Lateral - Public
-
Portion is connected to the Sanitary Sewer Lateral Public Portion
within one metre of the Combined Main Sewer.
(c) no person shall install a Joined Sanitary Foundation Drain Sewer
-
Lateral Private Portion or Joined Sanitary-Foundation Drain Sewer
-
Lateral Public Portion.
I 0 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(2) Where land is used for residential purposes, not more than one lot or
building or premises, is to be connected into one Sanitary Sewer Lateral or
into one Storm Sewer Lateral.
(3) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (2) of this section, where the
land is used for single family residential purposes, two lots, buildings or
premises may be connected to one existing Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
with the prior written consent of the City, in the City’s sole discretion. The
registered owners of the lots, buildings or premises to be connected to the
existing Sewer Lateral- Public Portion shall maintain, repair and make
necessary replacement of the existing Sewer Lateral - Public Portion and
the Sewer Lateral - Private Portion, and shall execute a Joint Use
Agreement, with content acceptable to the General Manager of Planning
and Economic Development, and in a form satisfactory to the City Solicitor,
and register the Joint Use Agreement on title against the subject lands, all
at the registered owners’ cost and expense and in accordance with all
applicable City by-laws.
(4) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (2) of this section, all
dwellings within a row of attached dwellings may be connected into one
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion or one Storm Sewer Lateral -
Public Portion, or both, if,
(a) in the case of one shared Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion,
each dwelling, or group of dwellings, has its own separate Sanitary
-
Building Drain connected to a shared Sanitary Sewer Lateral
Private Portion, and
(b) in all other cases, all dwellings remain in the same ownership, and
(c) the registered owner(s) of the dwellings receive the prior written
consent of the City, in the City’s sole discretion.
(5) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (2) of this section, where the
land is used for residential purposes and two or more lots, buildings or
premises are already connected to one Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, for
which there is no Joint Use Agreement with the City, the City will pay fifty
percent (50%) of the cost of the installation of each additional Sewer Lateral
-
Public Portion required so that no more than one lot, building or premises
is connected into one Sewer Lateral - Public Portion.
(6) Where land is used for non-residential purposes, not more than one lot or
building or premises is to be connected into one Sewer Lateral.
I1 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(7) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (6) of this section, separate
Sewer Laterals are not required for up to three (3) separate non-residential
parcels of land, provided that the registered owners of the parcels of land
receive the prior written consent of the City, in the City’s sole discretion, and
enter into a Joint Use Agreement, with content acceptable to the General
Manager of Planning and Economic Development and in a form satisfactory
to the City Solicitor, and register the Joint Use Agreement on title against
the subject lands, all at the said registered owners’ cost and expense and in
accordance with all applicable City by-laws.
(8) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (6) of this section, where a
group of buildings are erected on one parcel of land under one ownership,
all units or buildings may be connected into one Sanitary Sewer Lateral -
-
Public Portion or one Storm Sewer Lateral Public Portion, or both, if,
(a) in the case of one shared Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion,
each unit or building has its own separate Sanitary Building Drain
-
connected to a shared Sanitary Sewer Lateral Private Portion
located outside the building, and
(b) all units or buildings remain in the one ownership, and
(c) the registered owner(s) of all of the units or buildings receive the
prior written consent of the City, in the City’s sole discretion.
(9) Where any lot which is drained into a Main Sewer is sub-divided, each part
into which it is sub-divided is to be drained by a Sewer Lateral which is not
connected to any other land.
(10) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (9) of this section, separate
Sewer Laterals are not required for up to three (3) separate residential
parcels of land or for the property of up to three (3) separate condominium
corporations, provided that the registered owners of the parcels of land or
the condominium corporations, as applicable, receive the prior written
consent of the City, in the City’s sole discretion, and enter into a Joint Use
Agreement, with content acceptable to the General Manager of Planning
and Economic Development, and register the Joint Use Agreement on title
against the subject lands, all at the registered owners’ or condominium
corporations’ cost and expense and in accordance with all applicable City
by-laws.
(1 1) Notwithstanding the provisions of sub-section (9) of this section, where the
lot is used for other than industrial or commercial purposes, the existing
Sewer Lateral serving any building may be used for more than one lot,
12 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(a) if the building was constructed prior to the year 1975, and
(b) if the Main Sewer to which the building is connected was constructed
prior to the year 1975.
The provisions of sub-section (11) of this section do not apply to lots, the
buildings upon which are,
(a) demolished in whole or in part, or
(b) reconstructed in whole or in part.
Notwithstanding sub-section (1) of this section, a person may repair an
existing Sewer Lateral - Private Portion or Sewer Lateral - Public Portion or
both.
Notwithstanding sub-section (9) of this section, where an existing lot is sub-
divided into two separate lots, the existing Sanitary Sewer Laterals and the
existing Storm Sewer Laterals may be used by both lots provided that:
both lots are used for industrial or commercial purposes, and
the existing lot was serviced with Sewers before January 1, 1975,
and
the registered owners of both lots receive the prior written consent of
the City, in the City’s sole discretion, and
the registered owners of both lots enter into a Joint Use Agreement,
with content acceptable to the General Manager of Planning and
Economic Development, and in a form satisfactory to the City
Solicitor, and register the Joint Use Agreement on title against the
subject lots, all at the registered owners’ cost and expense and in
accordance with all applicable City by-laws.
PERMIT, BOND AND NOTICE
- -
Sanitarv Sewer Laterals Private Portion, Sanitarv Sewer Laterals Public Portion,
-
Branch Connections to Sanitary Sewer Laterals Private Portion and Lateral
-
Connections of Sanitarv Sewer Laterals Public Portion
6. (1) With the exception of work done by duly authorized employees of the City
or by contractors working on behalf of the City, no person is to commence
13 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
any work of constructing, reconstructing, repairing, installing, altering, or
connecting the whole or any part of any,
(a) Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion, or any appurtenance
thereof, or Branch Connection to a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private
Portion, without a sewer permit issued by the City, and
(b) Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or any appurtenance
thereof, or Lateral Connection of a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion,
(i) without a sewer permit issued by the City, and
(ii) if required, obtaining a road cut permit from the City.
- -
Storm Sewer Laterals Private Portion, Storm Sewer Laterals Public Portion,
-
Catchbasins connected to a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion, Branch
-
Connections to a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion and Lateral Connections of
-
a Storm Sewer Lateral Public Portion
(2) With the exception of work done by duly authorized employees of the City
or by contractors working on behalf of the City, no person is to commence
any work of constructing, reconstructing, repairing, installing, altering or
connecting the whole or any part of any,
-
(a) Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion, or any appurtenance thereof,
-
Catchbasin connected to a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion, or
-
Branch Connection to a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion,
without a sewer permit issued by the City, and
(b) Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or any appurtenance thereof,
or Lateral Connection of a Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion,
(i) without a sewer permit issued by the City, and
(ii) if, required, obtaining a road cut permit from the City.
(3) The sewer permits required under sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section
shall not be issued for any Sewer Lateral - Private Portion or any Sewer
-
Lateral Public Portion where, in the opinion of the General Manager of
Public Works, the Sanitary Sewer or Storm Sewer in respect of which the
permit has been applied for, has inadequate capacity to permit the
additional connection.
14 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(4) The sewer permits required under sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section
-
are not to be issued for a Sewer Lateral Public Portion until the person
who is to do the work has deposited with the General Manager of Public
Works,
an indemnity bond, issued by a surety company licensed to carry on
business in Ontario, in a form acceptable to the General Manager of
Finance and Corporate Services and the City Solicitor, for the sum of
$15,000.00 and which is to guarantee payment to the City of the cost
to it of all works and repairs carried out by the City, as a
consequence of that person's performance of the work, during each
year and for a period of two (2) years after completion of the work,
and
a certificate of insurance confirming the following coverages and
limits are in force for the person doing the work for the full duration of
the work (certificate holder will be addressed as the City of Hamilton,
City Hall, 71 Main Street West, Hamilton, Ontario L8P 4Y5, or such
other address as the General Manager of Public Works may require)
and providing that at least 30 days prior written notice (1 5 days, in
the case of automobile liability insurance, and 10 days in the event of
non-payment of premiums) shall be given to the City by the insurer
before the insurer or insured takes any steps to cancel, terminate,
fail to renew, amend or otherwise change or modify the insurance or
any part thereof:
(i) Commercial General Liability Insurance, written on IBC Form
2100 or its equivalent, including but not limited to bodily and
personal injury liability, property damage, products liability,
completed operations liability, owners and contractors
protective liability, blanket contractual liability, premises
liability, non-owned automobile liability and contingent
employer's liability coverage, having an inclusive limit of not
less than $2,000,000.0p0e r occurrence and in the aggregate,
endorsed to include the City of Hamilton as additional insured.
Coverage shall be included for pollution from "hostile fires".
(ii) Standard Form Automobile Liability Insurance that complies
with all requirements of the current legislation of the Province
of Ontario, having an inclusive limit of not less than, subject to
the following paragraphs (1) and (2), $1,000,000.00 per
occurrence:
(1) where the work will involve the use of one or more
automobiles or any combination of automobiles and
15 Sewer and Drain By-law
towed vehicles having in any case a combined
aggregate weight of 5 tonnes or more before loading,
$2,000,000.00 per occurrence; and
(2) where any combination of automobiles and towed
vehicles having in any case a combined aggregate
weight of 10 tonnes or more before loading,
$5,000,000.00 per occurrence.
The bond is to guarantee payment to the City of the cost and expense of all
works and repairs rendered necessary by or from the performance of the
work.
No person is to perform or commence any work of repairing any part of any
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion or Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or
appurtenance thereof, until after the person has notified the General
Manager of Public Works.
Every application for a sewer permit,
is to be in writing in the form provided by the City and is to be signed
by the Owner of the land to be drained, or by the Owner‘s agent duly
authorized in writing, and
is to show the full name and full address of the person who is to do
the work, and
is to be made by delivering the same to the City, together with,
(i) four (4) copies of proper plans and specifications, and
(ii) a complete analysis of the wastes to be discharged to all
Sewer Laterals - Public Portion from industrial or commercial
premises, and
is to include, where required by the City, the sewer permit fees set
forth in Schedule “A.
The City may waive the requirement for plans, specifications and analysis
described in sub-section (7) of this section, in relation to works described in
sub-sections (1) and (2) of this section that are under the jurisdiction and
control of the City wherever in the City’s opinion they may be safely
dispensed with.
16 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
STANDARDS FOR PIPE AND FITTINGS
7. (1) No person shall use any pipe, fittings andlor other appurtenances for Sewer
Laterals - Private Portion, Sewer Laterals - Public Portion, Branch
-
Connections to Sewer Laterals Private Portion and Lateral Connections of
the Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, unless the pipe, fittings and/or
appurtenances meet the standards set by the General Manager of Public
Works, or set by applicable legislation, as the case may be, in respect of
works described under this By-Law.
(2) No person is to install any Sewer Lateral - Public Portion,
(a) of a capacity that in the opinion of the General Manager of Public
Works is less than adequate, or
(b) of a diameter that is less than that of the Building Drain, and
that in any event is of a diameter of not less than 150 mm.
INSTALLATION OF SEWER LATERALS
8. (1) Every Sewer Lateral is to be designed, constructed and installed in
accordance with generally accepted good practice, with all joints completed
with suitable materials and in a proper workmanlike manner, finished clean
and smooth on both the outside and inside of the pipe, and, at the Line of
the Highway, having the top of the pipe at least 2.2 m below the level of the
finished surface of the roadway opposite that point, or at such higher
elevation only as may be necessitated by the level of the Main Sewer.
(2) Every Lateral Connection is to be constructed with proper "T" or "Y" fittings.
Saddles may only be used where approved by the General Manager of
Public Works.
(3) The slope of any Sewer Lateral is not to be less than one (I)g%rade.
(4) Every Sewer Lateral, throughout its length from the Main Sewer to the
building or other place to be drained is to be laid, as nearly as practicable, in
a straight line in a trench at a right angle from the Main Sewer and distant at
least 2.5 m from any existing water service pipe that was installed prior to
the installation of the Sewer Lateral. The 2.5 m between trenches is to be
measured horizontally between the closest parts of the water service pipe
and the Sewer Lateral. Only one Storm Sewer Lateral and one Sanitary
Sewer Lateral are to be installed in one trench.
17 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(5) Where excavation of bedrock is required over more than twenty-five per
cent (25%) of the length of the trench in order to install the Sewer Lateral,
then the installation of the Sewer Lateral may be permitted, with the prior
approval of the General Manager of Public Works in the same trench as the
water service pipe upon the following conditions,
(a) all water service pipes are to be laid 1.6 m below the finished grade
with a minimum of 150 mm of granular material being placed under
such pipe, and
(b) the crown of the Sewer Lateral is in all places to be not less than
500 mm below the invert of the water service pipe, and
(c) the Sewer Lateral is to be installed prior to the water service pipe,
and
each of the conditions described in this sub-section is to be complied with to
the satisfaction of the General Manager of Public Works.
(6) Where the installation is not permitted in the same trench as described in
sub-section (5) of this section, the water service pipe is to be laid in a
separate trench from the Sewer Lateral and the Sewer Lateral is to be a
distance of at least 2.5 m from the water service pipe, which is to be
measured horizontally between the closest parts of the water service pipe
and the Sewer Lateral.
(7) Where a Sewer Lateral - Public Portion is installed and backfilled prior to
-
the installation of the Sewer Lateral Private Portion, the end of the Sewer
Lateral -Public Portion at the limit of the highway is to be,
(a) tightly sealed with a proper cap; and
(b) carefully marked so that it can be readily located after the backfill is
placed, and
(c) made readily distinguishable by painting red the end of the Sanitary
Sewer Lateral - Public Portion.
(8) No person shall use a Sewer Lateral - Public Portion until,
(a) the Main Sewer has been accepted by the City and is in operation,
and
(b) the roof is on the building.
18 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
(9) A manhole is to be constructed by the Owner of the lands at the Owner's
cost and expense and in accordance with plans approved by the General
Manager of Public Works,
-
at the junction of the Main Sewer for every Sewer Lateral Public
Portion having a diameter equal to or greater than 300 mm, and
-
in the case of every Sewer Lateral Private Portion regardless of
size, carrying Industrial Sewage, in compliance with the requirements
of the City's Sewer Use By-law No. 04-1 50.
The Owner of the lands being serviced by a Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion is responsible that no part of the Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion, any appurtenance thereof, or Lateral Connection is back
filled or hidden from view, until notice has been given to, and the
work inspected by, the General Manager of Public Works.
-
No person shall backfill or hide any part of a Sewer Lateral Public
Portion, any appurtenance thereof, or any Lateral Connection from
view until there has been such notice and inspection referred to in
clause (a) of this sub-section.
(1I ) No person shall use an existing Sewer Lateral - Public Portion as the outlet
-
for a new Sewer Lateral Private Portion until it has been determined by
closed circuit television inspection, that it is of adequate size, at proper
depth and grade, in good condition and connected to the appropriate Main
Sewer.
(12 ) All roadways, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, sodding and other works
-
disturbed by a person during the installation of a Sewer Lateral Public
Portion or manhole shall be reinstated to a condition,
(a) that is at least equal to that existing before they were disturbed, and
(b) that is acceptable to the General Manager of Public Works.
PARKING AREA DRAINAGE
9. The Owner of a parking area for vehicles that is not contained within a building
shall ensure that such parking area is drained by Catchbasins, Storm Sewer Laterals
andlor other appropriate Stormwater drainage systems, in such manner as is approved
by the General Manager of Public Works.
19 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
MAINTENANCE, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF SEWER LATERALS
10. (1) The Owner of lands drained into any Main Sewer is, at the Owner's cost
and expense, to:
properly maintain, repair and make necessary replacement of,
(i) any Sewer Lateral - Private Portion, and
(ii) any Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, and
repair any roadway, shoulder, sidewalk , curb, sodding and any other
existing work that is,
-
(i) damaged by reason of a faulty Sewer Lateral Private
-
Portion and a faulty Sewer Lateral Public Portion or either of
them, or
(ii) disturbed by reason of the maintaining, repairing or
replacement of the Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and Sewer
Lateral - Public Portion or either of them.
(2) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) of this section, the City will maintain, repair
and replace the Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, except in the following
circumstances:
(a) where there is any blockage or Defect in the Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion deemed by the General Manager of Public Works to be a
result of negligence by an Owner or Occupant of the lands serviced
-
by the Sewer Lateral Public Portion, or
(b) where an Owner of the lands serviced by the Sewer Lateral - Public
Portion has entered into a Special Service Agreement. In such a
situation, the Owner who receives the benefit from such Special
Service Agreement shall maintain, repair and make any necessary
replacement of the entire Sewer Lateral until such time as a Sewer
Lateral is connected to the Main Sewer abutting the lands.
(3) In order for the City to maintain, repair and replace the Sewer Lateral -
Public Portion as set out in sub-section (2) of this section, the City shall
provide Sewer Lateral cleaning andlor investigation services upon request
by the Owner or Occupant of the lands who have experienced a loss of
sewer service. In those circumstances, the Owner or Occupant of such
lands, as applicable, shall pay a fee for the completed Sewer Lateral
cleaning and/or investigation services as set out in section 12 of Schedule
20 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
“At o this By-law should the results of the Sewer Lateral cleaning and/or
investigation services indicate that:
-
(a) there is no Defect in the Sewer Lateral Public Portion; or
(b) a blockage or Defect in the Sewer Lateral - Public Portion is deemed
by the General Manager of Public Works to be a result of the
negligence of an Owner or Occupant serviced by the Sewer Lateral-
Public Portion.
The City will only provide such Sewer Lateral cleaning and/or investigation
services where prior to commencing such services, the Owner or Occupant
provides written consent to such cleaning and/or investigation services
being performed on their property and also agrees to pay to the City any
applicable Sewer Lateral cleaning and/or investigation fee as described
above in this sub-section (3). Where a blockage or Defect is located on the
-
Sewer Lateral Public Portion, and is not the result of the negligence of an
Owner or Occupant, the City will assume all costs for the Sewer Lateral
cleaning and/or investigation services. In addition, any subsequent
maintenance, repair and replacement work deemed necessary by the City
to address the blockage or Defect on the Sewer Lateral - Public Portion will
be coordinated and paid for by the City.
(4) In order for the City to maintain, repair and replace the Sewer Lateral -
Public Portion as set out in sub-section (2) of this section, the City may also
provide Sewer Lateral cleaning and/or investigation services upon the
initiative of the City. The City will only provide such Sewer Lateral cleaning
and/or investigation services where prior to commencing such services, the
Owner or Occupant of the lands receiving the benefit of the Sewer Lateral
cleaning and/or investigation services provides written consent to the Sewer
Lateral cleaning and/or investigation services being performed on their
property. The City will be responsible for the costs of the Sewer Lateral
cleaning and/or investigation services initiated by the City.
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (3) of this section, the Owner or Occupant of
the lands who have experienced a loss of sewer service may retain a
contractor to provide Sewer Lateral cleaning and/or investigation services
and the City will reimburse the Owner or Occupant, as applicable, for the
costs of such Sewer Lateral cleaning and/or investigation services upon the
following conditions:
(a) the Owner or Occupant provides to the City an original invoice from
the contractor for the cleaning and/or investigation services; and
21 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
the Owner or Occupant provides to the City a closed circuit television
(CCTV) record of the Sewer Lateral, which record provides a clear
unobstructed image of the condition of the Sewer Lateral after the
Sewer Lateral has been cleaned by the contractor; and
the Owner or Occupant provides to the City surface locates of all
defects identified by the contractor to be in the Sewer Lateral, in a
manner and to a standard acceptable to the City; and
-
Sewer Lateral Defects are located on the Sewer Lateral Public
Portion; or
there are tree roots from a City Tree in the Sewer Lateral- Private
Portion. Subject to clause 10(6)(c) below, in cases where tree roots
from a City Tree exist in the Sewer Lateral - Private Portion, the City
will only reimburse the Owner or Occupant, as applicable, on a one-
time basis.
The City’s reimbursement of contractor expenses will be no greater than the
amounts set out in section 12 of Schedule “At o this By-law, less the City’s
administration fee. Equipment purchases, supply purchases and equipment
rental costs are not eligible for reimbursement by the City.
(a) Notwithstanding sub-section (1) of this section, where tree roots from
a City Tree have entered a Sewer Lateral - Private Portion the City
will reimburse the Owner or Occupant of the lands on which the
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion is located, on a one-time basis, for
the cost of the permanent repair or replacement of the entire Sewer
Lateral - Private Portion, up to a maximum of $1,500.00.
(b) To be eligible for the one-time reimbursement referred to in clause
10(6)(a) above, the permanent repair or replacement of the entire
Sewer Lateral- Private Portion must utilize materials and installation
methods approved by the General Manager of Public Works, and the
repair or replacement must be completed in accordance with all
applicable City standards and any other applicable legislation.
(c) Where as of the commencement date of this By-law, the City’s
records indicate that an Owner of lands has previously received
reimbursement from the City of 100% of the full cost and expense of
the removal of City Tree roots from the owner‘s Sewer Lateral, in
accordance with the previous provisions of By-law R79-172, the
Owner shall be allowed to continue to receive from the City 100%
reimbursement of the full cost and expense for the future removal of
such City Tree roots, at a rate of no more than two occasions in one
22 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
calendar year, until and including March 1, 2007, after which date,
the provisions of clauses 10(6)(a) and (b) shall apply to such Owner.
INSPECTION AND POWERS OF ENTRY
11. The General Manager of Public Works or other duly authorized employees or
agents of the City, displaying or producing proper identification and accompanied by any
person under his or her direction, may exercise a power of entry on behalf of the City, at
reasonable times, subject to the required notices and applicable entry rights under Parts
111 and XIV of the Municipal Act, 2001.
REMOVAL OR DEMOLITION OF BUILDINGS
12. When a building is removed or demolished, the Owner of the building is
-
responsible that every Sewer Lateral Public Portion is expQsed at the Line of the
Highway and reasonable notice is given to the General Manager of Public Works so that
it may be inspected and the Owner,
-
(a) if the Sewer Lateral Public Portion meets the requirements of this By-law
and is in good condition, is responsible for the plugging of that Sewer
Lateral - Public Portion at the Line of the Highway, and
-
(b) if the Sewer Lateral Public Portion does not meet the requirements of this
By-law and is not in good condition, is responsible
-
(i) to disconnect that Sewer Lateral Public Portion at the Main Sewer,
and
(ii) for the proper plugging of the Lateral Connection of the Main Sewer,
and
all such work that is required to be done under this paragraph is to be done
by a contractor who is bonded in accordance with the terms of this By-law,
and
(c) in respect of the roadways, shoulders, curbs, sidewalks, sodding and other
works disturbed during the removal or plugging of the Sewer Lateral -
Public Portion, is responsible to reinstate same to a condition
(i) that is at least equal to that existing before they were so disturbed,
and
(ii) that is acceptable to the General Manager of Public Works.
23 Sewer and Drain By-law
MISCELLANEOUS PROHIBITIONS
Obstructing Watercourses
13. (1) No person shall obstruct, allow the obstruction of or maintain any
obstruction in any open or closed drainage facility or natural watercourse.
(2) The City may by a notice in writing, require the Owner of the lands or any
other person, obstructing or allowing the obstruction of or maintaining the
obstruction of any drainage facility or natural watercourse, to do within a
specified time all such work as the City determines is necessary to remove
the obstruction as specified in the said notice.
Damaging or Obstructing Sewer
(3) No person shall do anything likely to damage or obstruct any part of the
Sewage Works of the City.
Tampering with City Sewage Svstem
(4) No unauthorized person shall tamper with any part of the Sewage Works of
the City or enter into any Main Sewer or other part of the Sewage Works.
REMEDIAL ACTION BY THE CITY
14. Wherever this By-law directs or requires any matter or thing be done by a person,
in default of it being done by the person directed or required to do it, such matter may be
done by the City at the person’s expense, in accordance with section 427 of the Municipal
Act, 2001.
SCHEDULES
15. Schedules “A”’ and “B” form part of this By-law.
PENALTY
16. Any person who contravenes any of the provisions of this By-law is guilty of an
offence and upon conviction is liable to the penalties under the Provincial Offences Act.
17. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 442 of the Municipal Act, 2001, when a
person has been convicted of an offence under this By-law, the Ontario Court (Provincial
24 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
Division) of the City of Hamilton, or any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in
addition to any other penalty or remedy imposed, make an order prohibiting the
continuation or repetition of the offence.
SHORT TITLE
18. This By-law may be known and referred to as "The Sewer and Drain By-law".
REPEAL
19. The following by-laws, and all amendments thereto, are hereby repealed:
(a) By-law R79-172 of the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth;
(b) By-law No. 247-75 of the former City of Stoney Creek;
(c) By-law No. 74-42 of the former Town of Ancaster; and
(d) By-law Nos. 217 4,2614-72 and 3240-81 of the former Town of Dundas.
EFFECTIVE DATE
20. This By-law shall come into force and take effect on March 1, 2006.
PASSED AND ENACTED the 15* day of February, 2006.
u
CLERK
MAYOR
25 Sewer and Drain By-law
SCHEDULE " A
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
1. Basic Fee for any sewer permit $52.28
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1 ) of this Schedule "A, the following
fees are payable:
-
for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral Private Portion and a
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $21.92
-
for a Storm Sewer Lateral Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $21.92
for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $21.92
for a Catchbasin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $21.92
inspect Storm Sewer $21.92
inspect Sanitary Sewer $21.92
2. Processing of Special Service Agreements $41 2.94
3. Special Service Agreements (sanitary or storm) $1,813.91
(sub-section 4( 1 ) of the By-law)
4. Special Service Agreements (sanitary and storm) $2,394.20
(sub-section 4(1) of the By-law)
5. Discharge of Special Service Agreements $21 9.56
-
6. Sanitary Sewer Lateral Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $219 .56
7. Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $32.89
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
26 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
8. Service Charge for Missed Appointments $98.28
and Inspections Not Ready and completed follow-up
inspection ($49.14 /visit)
9. Rental Rate for Landscaping Lease (Per Annum) Case Dependent
No Set Fee
-
10. Status of Special Service Agreements No Field Inspection $73.91
-
11. Status of Special Service Agreements Field Inspection $202.9 1
-
12. (a) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning Regular Hours $345.80 plus GST
(b) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - After Hours $460.51 plus GST
(c) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate $412.30 plus GST
(d) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $568.58 plus GST
-
(e) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation After Hours $694.93 plus GST
(9 Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation- Regular Hours $515.38 plus GST
-
(9) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation After Hours $641.73 plus GST
Notes to Schedule “A”:
1. Unless stated otherwise, all fees and charges are GST exempt.
2. “Regular Hours” means 7 a.m. - 5 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
3. “After Hours’’ means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday, Sunday,
public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized or required by
law to be closed.
4. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning’’ means services to relieve blockage(s) in the Sewer
Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer service.
5. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate” means services to locate any Defects in
the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television inspection.
6. “Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services to complete a thorough
cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer Lateral.
7. “Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services related to an unsuccessful
attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.
27 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
SCHEDULE “B”
PERFORMANCE BOND
KNOW ALL MEN BY THESE PRESENTS THAT WE (hereinafter
called the Principal) and (hereinafter called the Surety) are jointly and
severally held and firmly bound unto the City of Hamilton in the full amount of Fifteen
Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00) of lawful money of Canada, for which payment well and
truly to be made, we bind ourselves and each of us, and our respective heirs, executors,
successors, administrators and assigns, firmly by these presents.
WHEREAS pursuant to By-law No. , as amended, respecting
common sewers and drains, and By-law No. R84-026, as amended, respecting the
supply of water, both of the Council of the City of Hamilton, it is provided that no person
shall perform any such works on any street, land, road or public place in the City of
Hamilton, unless authorized in writing to do so by the General Manager of Public Works
and until the person shall furnish to the said General Manager a security to the
satisfaction of the said General Manager and the City Solicitor, and,
WHEREAS the above named Principal has made application to the said General
Manager for a licence to construct common sewers and drains in the City of Hamilton.
NOW THEREFORE the condition of this obligation is such that if the above named
Principal shall perform during the year, the work for which a permit was issued pursuant
to the said By-laws, and during the said year and for twenty-four (24) months after
completion of the said work, the Principal shall:
FIRSTLY: Indemnify and save harmless the City of Hamilton against all
damages, claims, actions, costs and expense which the City may
incur or be required to pay, or to pay, by reason of any claim for
damages or injury caused or alleged to be caused by the negligence
of the Principal or his agents or workmen, or by the negligent
construction or poor workmanship or material of any permitted work,
or by the lack of repair during the maintenance period above
20 Sewer and Drain Bylaw
mentioned, and
SECONDLY: shall pay to the City of Hamilton the cost of all works, repairs
executed and carried out by the City during the year in which the
permit was issued for such work, and for the maintenance period of
twenty-four (24) months thereafter, not to exceed Fifteen Thousand
Dollars ($15 ,000.00) made necessary resulting from the
construction, or excavation performed under the licence or permit
authorizing the work, then this obligation shall be void, but othetwise
it shall be and remain in full force and effect, not withstanding the
foregoing, it is understood and agreed that the liability of the Surety
hereunder shall be limited to the amount stated herein and shall not
be cumulative from year to year during the existence of this bond.
PROVIDED, however, this Bond may be terminated by the Principal and Surety on
their giving sixty (60) days notice in writing to the City of Hamilton of their intention to
terminate this Agreement insofar as any future work by the Principal is concerned,
provided they remain liable, however, for any work performed during the permit year up to
the date of such termination and thereafter for a maintenance period of two (2) years
respecting such terminated work.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF the Principal has hereunto set his hand and seal and the
said Surety has caused these presents to be sealed with its corporate seal, duly attested
by the signature of its proper officer authorized in that behalf on the day of 20 .
THIS BOND EXPIRES December 31st in the year in which it is issued.
SIGNED, SEALED AND DELIVERED )
in the presence of )
1
)
) Principal
1
)



Content from 06038 to amend zoning bylaws of the former area municipalitiespdf:
Authority: Item 12, Planning and Economic
Development Committee
Report: 06-003 (PED06050)
CM: March 1,2006
Bill No. 038
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-038
To Amend:
Zoning Bylaw No. 87-57 (Ancaster);
Zoning Bylaw No. 3581-86 (Dundas);
Zoning Bylaw No. 90-145-2 (Flamborough);
Zoning Bylaw No. 464 (Glanbrook);
Zoning Bylaw No. 6593 (Hamilton);
Zoning Bylaw No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek), and
Zoning Bylaw No. 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
Respecting:
PROHIBITION OF USE OF LAND WITHOUT ADEQUATE SERVICES
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, Statutes of Ontario, 1999 Chap. 14,
Sch. C. did incorporate, as of January 1, 2001, the municipality “City of Hamilton”;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the successor to the former area
municipalities known as the “The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster”, “The Corporation
of the Town of Dundas”, “The Corporation of the Town of Flamborough”, “The
Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook’, “The Corporation of the City of Hamilton”,
and “The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek, and is the successor to the former
Regi o na I Mu ni c ip aI i ty , na meI y , “The Regi on a I Mu ni cip aI i ty of Hami I t on- W ent wo rt h ;
”
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, provides that the Zoning By-laws
and Official Plans of the former area municipalities and the Official Plan of the former
Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth continue in force in the City of Hamilton
until subsequently amended or repealed by the Council of the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster
passed Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) on the 22nd day of June 1987, which by-
law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order on the 23rdd ay of January,
1989;
By-law prohibiting use of land without services (Page 2 of 7)
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Dundas passed
Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas) on the 22nd day of May 1986, which by-law was
approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 10th day of May 1988;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Flamborough
passed Zoning By-law No. 90-145-2 (Flamborough) on the 5th day of November 1990,
which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 21s t day
of December 1992;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook
passed Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook) on the 16th day of March 1992, which by-law
was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 31s t day of May 1993;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the City of Hamilton passed
Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) on the 25th day of July 1950, which by-law was
approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 7th day of December 1951,
(File No. P.F.C. 3821);
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek
passed Zoning By-law No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) on the 8th day of December 1992,
which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 31st
day of May, 1994;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton passed Zoning By-law 05-
200 (Downtown Hamilton) on the 25th day of May, 2005 which came into effect on the
same date;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is in conformity with the Official Plan of the former
City of Hamilton, the Official Plan of the former Town of Ancaster, the Official Plan of
the former Town of Dundas, the Official Plan of the former Town of Flamborough, the
Official Plan of the former Township of Glanbrook, the Official Plan of the City of
Stoney Creek);
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton, in adopting Item 12 of
Report 06-003 of the Planning and Economic Development Committee at its meeting
held on the 1'' day of March, 2006, recommended that Zoning By-law No. 87-57
(Ancaster), Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas), Zoning By-law No. 90-145-2
(Flamborough), Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook), Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton),
Zoning By-law 3692-92 (Stoney Creek), and Zoning By-law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
be amended as hereinafter provided.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Town of Ancaster
(a) Section 7 of Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) is hereby amended by
adding the following new subsection:
By-law prohibiting use of land without services (Page 3 of 7)
“7.29 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 7.27 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision, no
buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
0 adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an approved
waste disposal system and potable water supply to sustain the use
of land for buildings or structures are existing or have been provided
for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official and all regulatory
approvals have been received to the satisfaction of the General
Manager of the Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland Dedication
and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and Economic
Development Department and/or his or her designate.”
2. Town of Dundas
(a) Section 6 of Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas) is hereby amended by
adding the following new subsection:
“6.25 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 6.19.3a - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision,
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an approved
waste disposal system and potable water supply to sustain the use
of land for buildings or structures are existing or have been provided
for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official and all regulatory
By-law prohibiting use of land without services (Page 4 of 7)
approvals have been received to the satisfaction of the General
Manager of the Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received to
the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate.”
3. Town of Flamborough
(a) Section 5 of Zoning By-law No. 90-145-2 (Flamborough) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
“5.37 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 5.35 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision, no
buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing or
have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building
Official and all regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction ‘of the General Manager of the Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate;
and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton parkland Dedication
and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and Economic
Development Department and/or his or her designate.”
4. Township of Glanbrook
(a) Section 7 of Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook) is hereby amended by
adding the following new subsection:
By-law prohibiting use of land without services (Page 5 of 7)
“7.42 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 7.40 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision,
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing or
have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building
Official and all regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and Economic
Development Department and/or his or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received
to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate.”
5. City of Hamilton
(a) Section 6 of Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) is hereby amended by
adding the following new subsection:
“(22) ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 6.(20) - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision, no
buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an approved
waste disposal system and potable water supply to sustain the use
of land for buildings or structures are existing or have been provided
for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official and ail regulatory
By-law prohibiting use of land without services (Page 6 of 7)
approvals have been received to the satisfaction of the General
Manager of the Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received to
the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate.”
6. City of Stoney Creek
(a) Section 4.4 of Zoning By-law 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) is hereby amended
by adding the following new subsection:
“4.4.11 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 4.20 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision, no
buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an approved
waste disposal system and potable water supply to sustain the use
of land for buildings or structures are existing or have been provided
for to the satisfaction of the Chief Building Official and all regulatory
approvals have been received to the satisfaction of the General
Manager of the Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu of
parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been received to
the satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning and
Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate.”
7. Zoning By-law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
(a) Section 4 of Zoning By-law 05-200 - General Provisions is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
By-law prohibiting use of land without services (Page 7 of 7)
“4.22 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 4.15 of Zoning By-law No. 05-200 (Downtown
Hamilton) - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision, no buildings
or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-
lieu of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton
Parkland Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate.”
8. The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of notice of
the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Planning Act.
PASSED and CTED this 1’‘ day of March, 2006.
5
CI-05-1



Content from 06151 the city of hamilton public trees bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 13, Public Works, Infrastructure
and Environment Committee
Report 06-010 (PW06034a)
CM: June 14,2006
Bill No. 151
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-151
To Regulate the Planting, Maintenance, and
Preservation of Trees on or Affecting Public Property
WHEREAS Council deems it in the public interest to protect Hamilton's tree assets on
Public Property to preserve the quality of life and environment for the present and
future inhabitants, and to ensure that any necessary tree removal is considered in
advance and carried out under conditions as may be imposed;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act S.O. 2001, Chapter 25 as amended, Sections 2
and 8 through 11, allows that Council may provide necessary and desirable services,
manage and preserve public assets, foster environmental well-being, and exercise
specific and general powers to act, and to regulate and prohibit the acts of others;
AND WHEREAS the City, pursuant to Section 135 of the Municipal Act S.O. 2001,
Chapter 25 may by by-law prohibit or regulate the injuring or destruction of trees;
AND WHEREAS the City, pursuant to Section 141 of the Municipal Act may provide
trees to the owners of land adjacent to any highway;
AND WHEREAS the City, pursuant to Section 62(1) of the Municipal Act may, at any
reasonable time, enter upon land lying along any of its highways to inspect trees and
conduct tests on trees; and to remove decayed, damaged, or dangerous trees or
branches of trees if, in the opinion of the municipality, the trees or branches pose a
danger to the health or safety of any person using the highway;
AND WHEREAS the City, pursuant to Section 62(2) of the Municipal Act may remove
a decayed, damaged or dangerous tree or branch of a tree immediately without notice
to the owner of the land upon which the tree is located, if in the opinion of the
Employee or agent, the tree or branch poses an immediate danger to the health or
safety of any person using the highway;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chapter 14, Schedule C
did incorporate, as of January 1st 2001, the municipality known as the "City of
Hami I t o n
'I;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the successor to the following former area
municipalities, namely: The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster; The Corporation of
the Town of Dundas; the Corporation of the Town of Flamborough; The Township of
Glanbrook; The Corporation of the City of Hamilton; and the Corporation of the City of
-2- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
Stoney Creek, and to the Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, all hereinafter
referred to as the "former municipalities";
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, provides that the By-laws of the
former municipalities continue in force and effect in the City of Hamilton until
subsequently amended or repealed by the Council of the City of Hamilton;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Definitions and Application
l(1) In this By-law:
"City" as the context requires, means the municipal corporation "City of
Hamilton" or the geographical limits of the municipality;
"Contractor" means a person engaged to perform a specific activity or
service, on or at a particular land or premises;
"Council" means the Council for the City of Hamilton and includes its
successor;
"Destroy" in relation to a tree includes any action which causes or results
in the death of the tree, not limited to but including the acts of cutting,
burning or knocking over the tree, and "destruction" shall have a
corresponding meaning;
"Diameter at Breast Height or "DBH" means the diameter, including the
bark, of the trunk of a tree measured at the lower of (a) a point 1.3
meters (4 feet and 3 inches) above the ground in an undisturbed state at
the base of the tree, (b) in the case where the main trunk of the tree
splits below the point in (a) the point of measurement shall be at the
point on the tree trunk where the trunk separates, or (c) at the top of the
stump of the tree where the tree has been cut down and all that remains
of the stump is below the point in (a);
"Director" means the Director of Operations and Maintenance for the
and includes the Director's designate or successor;
"Drip Line" means the outer boundary of an area on the surface of the
ground directly below and which corresponds with the outer edge of the
crown of the tree;
"Emergency Work" means any work carried out by the City, a public
utility service, or other authority and its contractors, whether above and
below ground level, which is work necessary in an emergency situation
for maintenance, or to restore or ensure service is maintained, and
specifically includes the following whether as a repair, upgrade, or new
installation, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing: utility
- 3 - City of Hamilton Tree By-law
work, storm or accident damage repairs, road work, storm sewer and
sanitary sewer work;
"Employee" means all employees, servants, and agents of the City of
Hamilton or contractors hired by the City of Hamilton;
"Forestry and Horticulture Section" means the Forestry and Horticulture
Section of the Operations and Maintenance Division within the Public
Works Department of the City of Hamilton and includes its successor;
"Forestry Management Plan" refers to all City of Hamilton policies and
procedures governing forest health, tree maintenance, planting
requirements, activities affecting public trees, and includes the policies
attached to this By-law as schedules;
"Good Arboricultural Practice" shall be a reference to the guidelines and
practices relating to proper tree maintenance and care, as defined and
published by the ISA (International Society of Arboriculture);
"Highway" means a common and public highway under the jurisdiction of
the City of Hamilton, and includes any bridge, trestle, viaduct or other
structure forming part of a highway, and includes any portion of a
highway to the full width thereof;
"Improper Pruning" means trimming a tree so as to cause irreversible
damage in a manner contrary to Good Arboricultural Practices;
"Injure" includes any act or treatment which causes irreversible damage
to a tree and includes, but is not limited to the acts of changing grades
around trees so as to affect further growth or health of the tree by
exposing roots or burying the trunk or branches, compacting soil over
root areas so as to prevent sufficient absorption by the tree of water,
severing or damaging roots, the improper application of chemicals,
improper pruning or the removal of bark and "injuring" and "injury" shall
have corresponding meanings;
"Municipal Law Enforcement Officer" means a person appointed as such
under this or any by-law of the City;
"Naturalized Area" means an area that has been set aside by the City of
Hamilton for the undisturbed growth of any tree species where the
desired effect is that of natural growth, and for the purposes of this By-
law the term will include municipal woodlots and woodlands;
"Officer" means any person designated by the Director to carry out
duties, issue orders or take actions under this By-law, and the term
includes the Director;
-4- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
(s) “Operations and Maintenance Division” refers to the Operations and
Maintenance Division of the Public Works Department of the City of
Hamilton and includes its successor;
(t) “Pest” means any organism, including but not limited to such things as
insects or diseases whether viral, fungal, or bacterial, which directly or
indirectly cause irreversible damage to the long-term health, vitality,
longevity, and integrity of a tree;
(u) “Planning and Economic Development Department” refers to the
Planning and Economic Development Department for the City of
Hamilton and includes its successor;
(v) “Private Property” means land other than public property, and includes
those public unassumed alleys which have been occupied or fenced by
a person other than the City;
(w) “Private Tree” means any tree which has greater than fifty (50) per cent
of its trunk diameter measured at ground level on private property;
(x) “Pruning” means the cutting away of parts of a tree for reasons including
but not limited to: safety concerns; maintenance of legislated
clearances; tree health and vitality; disease control; clearance for
pedestrian and vehicular traffic; visibility clearance for stop signs, traffic
signals, and bus stops; clearance for buildings; removal of deadwood;
crown thinning for tree health or to improve sunlight penetration; crown
balancing to correct storm damage; crown reduction when overall size is
considered problematic; or clearance from hydro lines and other utilities;
(y) “Public Property” includes a highway, park, public unassumed alley, or
any other public place or land owned by, or leased to, or controlled by, or
vested in, the City;
(z) “Public Tree” means any tree which has greater than or equal to fifty (50)
per cent of its trunk diameter measured at ground level on public
property, and “public tree” shall be used interchangeably with “municipal
tree”, “municipally owned tree”, “City tree” or “City owned tree”;
(aa) “Public Works Department” means the Public Works Department for the
City of Hamilton and includes its successor;
(bb) “Removal” means the elimination, in whole or in part, of a tree;
(cc) “Tree” means a plant of any species of woody perennial including its root
system, which has reached or can reach a height of at least 4.5 metres
at physiological maturity;
-5- City of Hamilton Tree Bylaw
"Tree Maintenance" includes all operations of watering, trimming,
pruning, spraying, injecting, fertilizing, treating, cabling and bracing, and
any other like activity;
"Tree Protection Zone (TPZ)" means a restricted area, enclosed by
fencing, around the base of a tree with a minimum radius equal to the
drip line, which serves to protect a tree and its root zone;
"Work" means the labour, task, duty, function, or assignment often being
a part or a phase of a larger activity or project, and shall include, but not
be restricted to, excavation, construction, development, ditching,
tunnelling, trenching, soil disturbances, or compaction.
l(2) In this By-law, the singular tense is deemed to be inclusive and
interchangeable with the plural tense; the plural tense is deemed to be
inclusive and interchangeable with the singular tense.
l(3) In this By-law, where both metric and imperial measurements are given for the
same item, the imperial measurement is provided for convenience only and is
approximate.
2(1) Subject to subsection 2(2), this By-law applies to:
(a) Persons within the City of Hamilton;
(b) Public trees; and
(c) Private trees, which pose a threat or hazard to persons or property on
public property.
2(2) This By-law does not apply to:
(a) Trees in private woodlands, as woodlands are defined in By-law
No. ROO-054 of the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton-
Wentworth, or such successor by-law enacted under the authority
of Section 135 of the Municipal Act;
(b) Woodlots, as defined in By-law No. 4401-96, as amended of the former
City of Stoney Creek; or
(c) The matters listed in sub-section 135(12) of the Municipal Act.
2(3) The requirements and prohibitions in this By-law are in addition to any
applicable prohibitions or requirements in the City of Hamilton Parks By-law No.
01-219 as amended, and in the event of conflict, the provisions which are most
protective of trees prevail.
Authority of the Director
-6- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
The Director is hereby authorized to administer and enforce this By-law and has
delegate authority granted by Council to execute the provisions of this By-law
or to provide consent or approval where required, including the imposition of
conditions as necessary to ensure compliance with this By-law and ensure
minimal removal or other negative effects from removal of trees.
The Director may request municipal law enforcement officers to enforce this By-
law, who shall have the authority to carry out inspections, issue orders, and
otherwise enforce this By-law, and the Director may assign duties or delegate
tasks under this By-law whether in his or her absence or otherwise.
The Director has the authority to develop and maintain a Forestry Management
Plan including level of service standards and practices / guidelines.
Where consent of the Director is required under this By-law, and where
permission or approval has been refused, or where permission or approval has
been granted and subsequently withdrawn, written justification must be
provided to the individual detailing the basis for not granting approval.
In addition to the authority otherwise provided in this By-law and subject to the
Council authorized budget, the Director is authorized to perform or arrange the
performance of the following duties:
(a) Supervision of the planting, care, and maintenance of public trees;
(b) Supervision of the pruning or removal of trees:
(i) Upon public property;
(ii) Upon private property where the branches extend over public
property and the removal is performed by City employees or
contractors; or
(iii) Upon a highway where the branches of any public or private tree
extend over a highway and the removal is performed by City
employees or contractors.
The Director, once designated as an inspector by the President of the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency, for the purposes of the Plant Protection Act,
S. C. 1990, c.22, has the authority to inspect for the presence of pests and to
take action including the removal of trees on all public and private property, in
accordance with that Act.
Prohibitions Against Injury or Destruction
8 No Person shall undertake to or cause or permit the undertaking of any of the
following actions towards a public tree:
-7- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
Injure, remove, disturb, damage, destroy, cut above or below ground,
spray, prune, or alter in any way a public tree; without prior approval and
compliance with terms provided in Section 10, or as provided for in the
City of Hamilton Public Tree Removal Policy; or
Deposit, place, store, or maintain any stone, brick, sand, concrete, soil,
or any material, equipment, or vehicles that may impede the free
passage of water, air, or nutrients to the roots of a public tree, or perform
any work within the dripline of a public tree which causes the destruction
of, removal of, or injury to the tree, without prior approval and
compliance with terms provided in Section 10; or
Fasten any sign, bill, notice, wire, rope, nail, or other object to, around,
on, or through any public tree in any manner, or around, on or through
the stakes or posts that protect such tree; or
Cause or permit any gaseous, liquid, or solid substances which are
harmful or toxic to any public tree, to come in contact with any public
tree, or apply to a public tree or an area used by said tree’s root system;
or
Set fire to or permit any fire to burn where such fire or the heat thereof
will injure any portion of any public tree; or
Interfere with fences, structures, barriers delineating tree protection
zones, or associated signage or other protective devices around any
public tree; or
Alter or change any soil levels on public property within the drip line of
any public tree in a manner likely to cause injury to said tree; without
prior approval and compliance with terms provided in Section 10; or
Excavate any ditch, tunnel, trench, or lay any walkway or driveway, or
disturb the soil on public property, within the drip line of a public tree;
without prior approval and compliance with terms provided in Section 10;
or
Climb, or permit any person under their care or control to climb any
public tree.
9(1) A person who damages or injures a public tree on public property or who
causes or permits a person to damage or injure such a tree, shall be subject to
the regulations listed in the City of Hamilton Reforestation Policy - Municipally
Owned Lands in addition to any necessary enforcement under this By-law.
9(2) Where a person reports having injured or damaged a public tree, or where a
person is found to have injured or damaged a public tree, the Director shall
issue an order requiring that the person arrange for the payment of restitution in
accordance with the regulations of the City of Hamilton Reforestation Policy -
- 8 - City of Hamilton Tree By-law
Municipally Owned Lands, in addition to any necessary enforcement of this By-
law.
Protective Measures For Trees During Construction
10 Any person undertaking to perform any work within the drip line of a public tree,
requires the consent of the Director, and shall follow the regulations and
conditions listed in the City of Hamilton Tree Preservation and Protective
Measures For Trees Affected by Construction Policy and otherwise shall
comply with any conditions imposed through the Director's consent.
Planting of Trees
Prohibited Species
11 ( 1 ) No person shall plant or place, or cause or permit the planting or placing of a
tree of the type or species listed below upon public property:
Acer negundo - Manitoba Maple;
Acer saccharinum - Silver Maple;
Populus spp. - Poplar Species;
Salix spp. - Willow Species;
-
Ulmus pumila Siberian Elm; or
-
Ginkgo biloba Female only.
1l (2) Unless authorized by the Director in writing, no person shall plant or place, or
cause or permit the planting or placing of any coniferous trees upon public
property.
Planting Trees on Public Property
12(1) No person shall, without prior written consent of the Director, plant or cause to
be planted any tree on public property.
12(2) The City reserves the right, at its sole discretion, to plant, or to have
planted trees on any portion of public property.
12(3) All trees planted by the City of Hamilton, or by any contractor or person on
public property, are subject to this By-law, the City of Hamilton Street Tree
Planting Policy - New Developments; and the City of Hamilton Street Tree
Planting Policy - Planning & Design.
12(4) Any Tree planted or located on a highway is deemed to be a public tree and is
subject to all the provisions and regulations contained in this By-law as well as
-9- City of Hamilton Tree Bylaw
to the City of Hamilton Street Tree Planting Policy - New Developments; City of
Hamilton Street Tree Planting Policy - Planning & Design; and the City of
Hamilton Street Tree Planting Policy - Rural Roadways.
13( 1) Notwithstanding Section 12;
(a) Any tree planted on public property with or without the consent of the
Director, is the property of the City, is deemed to be a public tree, and is
subject to all terms and conditions as set out in this By-law;
(b) For greater certainty, a tree referred to in subsection (a) above may be
treated as a public tree or removed as provided for in this By-law, and in
particular, any tree removed by the City may be removed without
compensation owing by the City, and if removed by someone other than
the City without the required permission for removal by the City, may
result in enforcement, claims for compensation, and replanting costs and
orders, and if such tree planted is a prohibited species, may be removed
by the City or its contractors at the expense of the person planting or
causing such planting to occur.
Tree Planting on Private Property
14( 1) Any tree planted on private property, whether planted by the City or by any
other person, is the property of the land owner and as such is the owner‘s sole
responsibility.
14(2) The owner of property on which a private tree is standing shall not permit or
leave the tree or branches thereof projecting over the highway in such manner
as to obstruct the reasonable and safe use of the highway.
Removal of Trees
15 All authorized public tree removals and all private tree removals or pruning
carried out by or on behalf of the City shall be performed by the City or by a
contractor approved by the Director.
16 Excluding those public tree removals performed as “necessary for the public
interest”, as that phrase is defined in Section 18:
(a) The removal of all live, healthy public trees shall be subject to the
provisions of the City of Hamilton Reforestation Policy - Municipally
Owned Lands; and the City of Hamilton Public Tree Removal Policy;
(b) A person removing, injuring or damaging a public tree, where the
Director in his sole discretion, decides that the tree needs to be
replaced, shall, in addition to any enforcement of this By-law, be subject
to the requirements of the City of Hamilton Reforestation Policy.
-
10- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
Public Tree Removals
17 The Director is authorized to remove or cause to be removed a tree or part
thereof on public property when it is considered "necessary for the public
interest", as that phrase is defined in Section 18, or in accordance with the City
of Hamilton Public Tree Removal Policy.
Necessary for the Public Interest
18 For the purpose of Section 17, "necessary for the public interest" means
removal for one or more of the following reasons:
A tree is decayed in whole or in part;
A tree that has failed, or in its current physiological condition has the
potential to fail, and by its failure, or potential failure, poses a direct and
immediate threat to public property or to individuals using public
pr o pe rty ;
A tree that is a source, host, or infested with any pest which directly or
indirectly causes irreversible damage to the long-term health, vitality,
longevity, and integrity of a tree;
A tree whose structural value, or integrity, as determined by the Director,
has been seriously compromised by construction, weather related
events, or by pruning;
A tree planted along a highway which obstructs or impedes the safe use
of the same;
A tree whose root system has been proven to compromise the structural
integrity of the foundation of any building; or
A tree of poor quality, or undesirable species whose removal is required
to facilitate new street tree plantings.
Naturalized Areas
19(1) No person shall remove, or cause, or permit the removal of any public tree that
has fallen in a naturalized area from such area.
19(2) Any public tree that has fallen in a naturalized area and impedes on the use of
public property may be cut back by the City of Hamilton so as to provide safe
access and use of the public property, however, the tree will not be removed
from the area.
Private Trees
- -
11 City of Hamilton Tree By-law
Subsections (2) and (3) of this section do not apply where the City does not
enter private property for its property or highway maintenance purposes, and in
particular do not apply when the City, from its own property, removes the
portions of private trees growing upon or over its property and highways for the
purposes of property or highway maintenance so as to ensure reasonable or
appropriate use of the property or highway as determined solely by the City and
the elimination of dangers or obstructions for users of the City properties or
highways; and further, any rights or permissions granted in this or any by-law to
persons to maintain trees on private property or part of the road allowance, or
other public property shall be subject to this provision for needs or maintenance
purposes and so as to allow the City to meet the legal obligations to maintain its
highways and carry out its intentions towards use of its properties for its own
and the public benefit.
Pursuant to section 62 of the Municipal Act, 2001 and in accordance with
section 431 of that Act where required, a municipal employee or a contractor of
the municipality, for the purpose of tree trimming in relation to highways or for
the maintenance of highways, may where necessary, at any reasonable time,
enter on lands adjacent to any of its highways to:
(a) inspect or conduct tests on trees; or
(b) remove decayed, damaged or dangerous trees or their branches, where
in the opinion of the employee or contractor, the tree or branch poses a
danger to the health and safety of any person using the highway.
Pursuant to subsection 62(2) of the Municipal Act, 2001 a municipal employee
or a contractor, where such person is of the opinion that a tree or branch of
land adjacent to the highway poses an immediate danger to the health and
safety of any person using the highway, where necessary and in accordance
with paragraphs (b), (c) or (d) of section 431 of that Act where required, may
enter the land without notice to remove the tree or branch.
Subsections 20(2) and (3) do not permit entry into a building on the land
excepting where proper notices have been given or permissions obtained.
The owner of private property shall ensure that all trees growing partially on
public property are maintained in good condition and state of repair, free of
decay or damage, such that the tree or branches thereof do not pose a danger
to persons on City properties or its highways.
The obligations in subsection 20(5) shall be deemed to include the requirement
of the owner to cause or carry out such inspections and testing as are
reasonably necessary to determine the condition of the private tree and its
branches.
Regulations and Enforcement
Exclusions and Exceptions
-12- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
21 The provisions of this By-law shall not apply to:
(a) The employees of the City of Hamilton while engaged in the
performance of their duties;
(b) The operators, drivers and attendants of authorized emergency services
vehicles, Police Officers, Officers of the Hamilton Fire Service, or
Municipal Law Enforcement Officers appointed by the Council of the City
of Hamilton, while engaged in the performance of their duties; or
(c) The operators, drivers and attendants of authorized public utility
companies including, but not limited to, a natural gas utility, a hydro
electric provider, and any other public utility, or telecommunication
company, provided that their vehicles and crews are clearly identified by
a crest or other marking and provided the operator, driver or attendant is
actively engaged in the provision of any emergency services offered by
the utility.
Enforcement
22 A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer, an employee of the City designated as
an officer by the Director for the purpose of this Section or a police officer is
authorized to inform any person of the provisions of this By-law, to issue
warnings or notices, and to issue an order for discontinuance or for compliance
therewith in the terms and content required by Section 137 of the Municipal Act,
S. 0. 2001, c. 25.
23(1) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer or police officer may enforce the
provisions of this By-law.
23(2) An officer appointed for the purposes of this By-law may be issued identification
by the Director for purposes including the issuing of orders.
Penalty and Remedies for Breach or Contravention
24 Any Person contravening any provision of this By-law or contravening an order
to discontinue issued under this By-law pursuant to section 137 of the Municipal
Acf is guilty of an offence, and upon conviction is liable to the fines and
obligations for replanting and rehabilitation specified in Section 138 of the
Municipal Act, S. 0. 2001, Chapter 25.
25(1) In addition to any other remedy and to any penalty imposed by the By-law, a
court in which a conviction has been entered under this By-law, and any court
of competent jurisdiction thereafter may:
(a) Make an Order prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the offence by
the person convicted; and
-13- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
(b) Order the person to rehabilitate the land or to plant or replant trees in
such a manner and within such period as the court considers appropriate,
including any silvicultural treatment necessary to re-establish the trees.
25(2) Where under this By-law a person is required or directed that a matter or thing
be done and the person defaults or otherwise fails to comply, the Director may,
pursuant to section 427 of the Municipal Act, 2001, carry out the thing or cause
the matter to be done at the person’s expense, and recover the City’s costs as
defined in that section by action or by adding the costs to the tax roll for the
person and collecting them in the same manner as taxes.
Severance
26 Should a court of competent jurisdiction declare a part or whole of any provision
of this By-law to be invalid or of no force or effect, the provision or part is
deemed severable from this By-law, and it is the intention of Council that the
remainder survive and be applied and enforced in accordance with its
remaining terms to the extent possible under law.
Short Title
27 The Short Title of this By-law shall be “The City of Hamilton Public Trees By-
law”.
Repeals and Enactment
28(1) The following By-laws of the former area municipalities, as may be amended,
are hereby repealed: By-law No. 41 56-95 (Stoney Creek), By-law No. 91-36-P
(Flamborough), By-law No. 4502-99 (Dundas), By-law No. 4486-99 (Dundas),
By-law No. 241-82 (Glanbrook), and By-law No. 92-1 55 (Hamilton).
28(2) By-law No. 86-077 (Hamilton Streets By-law), as may be amended, is hereby
further amended in the following respects:
At the beginning of subsection 4(2), deleting the words “Subject to the
provisions of this By-law respecting trees on highways, and”;
Within subsection 4(2) repealing the words “grass, flowers and trees”
and replacing them with the words “grass and flowers”;
Section 5 of By-law No. 86-077 (Hamilton Streets By-law), as amended,
is hereby repealed;
Sub-section 16(9) of By-law No. 86-077 (Hamilton Streets By-law), as
may be amended, is hereby further amended by repealing the words “of
trees” after the word “climbing”; and
-
14- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
(e) In all other respects, By-law No. 86-77 (Hamilton) is confirmed without
change.
28(3) By-law No. 328-86 (Glanbrook) as may be amended is hereby further amended
by deleting “tree,” from clause 8(g), and in all other respects, By-law No. 328-86
(Glanbrook) is confirmed without change.
28(4) By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) as may be amended, is hereby further
amended in the following respects:
the title to By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is repealed and replaced with
the following:
“Being a By-law to Prohibit the Injury or Destruction of Specified Classes
of Trees on Private Property in the Geographic District of former Town of
Ancaster in the City of Hamilton”;
By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is further amended by repealing and
replacing section 2.20 with the following:
“2.20 “Owner” means the owner as registered on title to the lands.”;
By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is further amended by repealing and
replacing section 2.31 with the following:
“2.31 “woodland” means any area of private land of 0.2 hectare (0.5
acres) or more with at least:
1000 trees per hectare (405 trees per acre) of any size;
750 trees per hectare (303 trees per acre) measuring over 5
centimetres (2 inches) DBH;
500 trees per hectare (202 trees per acre) measuring over 12
centimetres (5 inches) DBH; or
250 trees per hectare (101 trees per acre) measuring over 20
centimetres (8 inches) DBH, not including orchards or plantations.
For the purposes of this By-law, the boundary of the woodland
shall be defined by the ecological limit of the woodland and not by
private property boundaries, and shall include the area up to the
drip line of the woodland and any corridors measuring up to 30
metres in width. Where a potential woodlot is dissected by a
corridor or natural feature such as a creek, the area of the
woodlot shall be calculated exclusive of the area of the corridor or
natural feature.”;
-
15- City of Hamilton Tree By-law
By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is further amended by repealing and
replacing clause 3.1.2(i) with the following:
“(i) Heritage Trees on private lands located outside of Woodlands;”;
By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is further amended by repealing and
replacing clause 5.1 .l(ii) with the following:
“(ii) for the removal of Heritage Trees on private lands within 7.5
metres (25 feet) of the outer edge of an Occupied Building;”;
By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is further amended by repealing
Sections 2.25, 5.1.2, 9.3.1, 9.3.2, 9.3.3, 9.3.4, 9.3.5 and 9.3.6 in their
entirety; and
In all other respects By-law No. 2000-1 18 (Ancaster) is hereby confirmed
without change.
28(5) By-law No. 4513-99 (Dundas) as may be amended, is hereby further amended
by repealing and replacing subsection 3(e) with the following:
“(e) Trees overhanging onto private land from abutting private lands are
specifically included under the Control of this By-law.”
29 Further to Section 28, any references to the aforementioned By-laws and
schedules in other City policies, signage or By-laws, as amended, antedating
the passing and enactment of this By-law, shall be deemed a reference to this
By-law.
30 This By-law shall come into force and take effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED and ENACTED this 14‘h day of June, 2006.
MAYOR



Content from 06166 to amend zoning bylaw no 05200pdf:
Authority: Item 19, Planning & Economic
Development Committee
Report 06-009 (PEDO6152)
CM: June 14,2006
Bill No. 166
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-166
To Amend Bylaw 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones for
the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply
to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of this By-law;
AND WHEREAS it is desired to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively
deal with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By-law will be enacted and
come into force and effect in several stages;
AND WHEREAS, Council enacted the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-
law 05-200, on May 25, 2005;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is the second stage and is applicable to the Parks
and Open Space lands within the Urban Area of the City, as hereinafter
described and depicted;
AND WHEREAS this By-law will be in conformity with the following Official Plans,
upon approval of the Official Plan Amendments listed below;
The Official Plan of the former Town of Ancaster, as amended by Official
Plan Amendment No. 110;
The Official Plan of the former Town of Dundas, as amended by Official
Plan Amendment No.11;
The Official Plan of the former Town of Flamborough, as amended by
Official Plan Amendment No. 104;
The Official Plan of the former City of Hamilton, as amended by Official
Plan Amendment No. 205;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones
Page 2 of 7
The Official Plan of the former Township of Glanbrook, as amended by
Official Plan Amendment No. 54 and,
The Official Plan of the former City of Stoney Creek, as amended by
Official Plan Amendment No. 126.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton hereby enacts as follows:
1. That Section 2.1, of By-law 05-200, be amended by adding the following
additional land use classifications zones and symbols:
“b) Open Space and Parks Classification
Zones Zone Svmbol
Neighbourhood Park Zone PI
Community Park Zone P2
City Wide Park Zone P3
Open Space Zone P4
Consen/ation/Hazard Land Zone P5”
2. That Section 2.3, of By-law 05-200, be amended by adding reference to Map
Numbers 382, 413-414, 445, 481-482, 515-516, 549, 550, 680, 715-716,
743, 753, 780, 784-785, 793, 81 7-820, 823-828, 834-835, 859-862, 865-
871, 877, 899-902, 904, 906-909, 91 2-913 , 919 -920, 942-946, 948, 950-951,
954-962, 983-985, 989-990, 992-993, 995-996, 998-10 06, 1033, 1035-10 47,
1049-10 51, 1078-10 88, 1090-10 93, 1097-10 98, 11 00, 1 124-11 26, 11 28,
1131-1137, 1140, 1142, 1144-1145, 1149-1150, 1152, 1173-1178, 1180-
11 88, 11 90-11 98, 1205-12 07, 1227-12 31, 1234-12 36, 1238-12 45, 1247-
1253, 1256, 1259-12 60, 1279-12 81, 1283-12 84, 1286-12 94, 1296, 1298-
1306, 131 1-13 12 , 1332-13 36, 1339-13 49, 1352, 1357, 1364-13 65, 1385-
1387, 1391- 1 396, 1398-14 01, 1403-14 05, 1436, 1437, 1442-14 43, 1446-
1451, 1454-14 56, 1494-15 00, 1502-15 04, 1542, 15 46-1 547, 1550-15 51,
1590-15 91, 1595-15 97, 1634-16 35 and 1676, all inclusive.
3. That Map Numbers 91 0, 91 1, 952, 953 and 994 of Schedule “A” to By-law
05-200, be amended by incorporating additional zone boundaries as shown
on the corresponding new maps, attached as Schedule A to this By-law.
4. That Schedule “A”, to By-law 05-200, be amended by adding the following
additional new maps 382, 413-414, 445, 481-482, 515-516, 549, 550, 680,
715 -716 , 743, 753, 780, 784-785, 793, 81 7-820, 823-828, 834-835, 859-
862, 865-871, 877, 899-902, 904, 906-909, 912 -913, 91 9-920, 942-946, 948,
950-951, 954-962, 983-985, 989-990, 992-993, 995-996, 998-10 06, 1033,
1035-10 47, 1049-10 51, 1078-10 88, 1090-10 93, 1097-10 98, 11 00, 11 24-
To Amend By-law 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones
Page 3 of 7
1126, 1128, 1131-1137, 1140, 1142, 1144-1145, 1149-1150, 1152, 1173-
1 178, 11 80-11 88, 11 90-11 98, 1205-12 07, 1227-12 31, 1234-12 36, 1238-
1245, 1247-12 53, 1256, 1259-12 60, 1279-12 81 , 1283-12 84, 1286-12 94,
1296, 1298-13 06, 131 1-13 12 , 1332-13 36, 1339-13 49, 1352, 1357, 1364-
1365, 1385-13 87, 1391- 1 396, 1398-14 01, 1403-14 05, 1436, 1437, 1442-
1443, 1446-14 51, 1454-14 56, 1494-15 00, 1502-15 04, 1542, 1546-15 47,
1550-15 51, 1590-15 91, 1595-15 97, 1634-16 35 and 1676, all inclusive and,
attached as Schedule “B” to this By-law.
5. That Section 3, of By-law 05-200, be amended by adding the following
definitions :
“Cemetery Shall mean land used for the interment of human
remains and may include a mausoleum,
columbarium, crematorium or structure intended
for, or used in, the interment of human remains.
Conservation Shall mean the use of land, buildings or
structures for the purpose of the protection and
management of the natural environment.
Marina Shall mean a commercial establishment or
premises, containing docking or mooring facilities
where boats or boat accessories are berthed,
stored, serviced, repaired, constructed or kept for
sale or lease and where facilities for the sale of
marine fuels or lubricants, ancillary retail sales,
ancillary restaurants and taxi and/or barging
service may also be provided.
Recreation Shall mean the use of lands for leisure, passive
and/or athletic activities, and shall include
Recreation, Passive.
Recreation, Passive Shall mean activities that involve relatively
unorganized recreational pursuits, generally in the
outdoors, such as walking, sitting and picnicking.“
6. That Section 4.4, of By-law 05-200, be amended by adding the words to the
last sentence “the Neighbourhood Park (PI) Zone or” between the words
“shall not apply to” and “any use.”
7. That Section 5.6, of By-law 05-200, be amended by adding the following new
subsection:
“c) Parkina Schedule for All Zones. exceDt the Downtown Zones
To Amend Bylaw 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones
Page 4 of 7
Column 1
i. Residential Uses
ii. Institutional Uses
iii. Educational Uses
iv. Commercial Uses
Bowling Alley 4 per lane, not including restaurant
Driving Range/Mini Golf 1.5 per tee or hole
Fitness Club 1 for each 15.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Golf Course 6 for each hole
Marina 1 for each boat slip
Other Commercial Uses not 1 for each 30 square metres of gross
Listed Above floor area, which accommodates
such use.”
8. That By-law 05-200 be amended by adding a new Section 7, and the
following:
“7.1 NEIGHBOURHOOD PARK (PI) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Neighbourhood Park (PI) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto.
Such erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
7.1 .I PERMITTED USES Recreation
7.1.2 PROHIBITED USES Notwithstanding Section 7.1 .It,h e
following uses are prohibited, even as
an accessory use:
Arena
Community Centre
To Amend By-law 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones
Page 5 of 7
Stadium
Swimming Pool
Tennis Courts
7.1.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Side and Rear 7.5 metres
Yard
b) Maximum Building Height 5.0 metres
c) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
d) Maximum Building Gross i) 100 square metres; and,
Floor Area ii) The building shall only be used
for utility and storage purposes.
7.2 COMMUNITY PARK (P2) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Community Park P2 Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
7.2.1 PERMITTED USES Recreation
7.2.2 REGU LATIONS
a) Minimum Side and Rear 7.5 metres
Yard
b) Maximum Building Height 11 metres
c) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
7.3 CITY WIDE PARK (P3) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a City Wide Park (P3) Zone for any purpose other
To Amend Bylaw 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones
Page 6 of 7
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
7.3.1 PERMITTED USES Commercial Entertainment
Commercial Parking Facility
Commercial Recreation
Marina
Recreation
Restaurant
Retail
7.3.2 PROHIBITED USES Drive-through Facility
7.3.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Side and Rear 7.5 metres
Yard
b) Maximum Building Height 11 metres
c) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
d) Maximum Size for No retail use shall exceed 100 square
Retail metres of gross floor area for any
individual establishment
7.4 OPEN SPACE (P4) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within an Open Space (P4) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
7.4.1 PERMITTED USES Ag ricu Itu r e
Botanical Gardens
Cemetery
Conservation
Golf Course (excluding mini-golf)
Nature Centres
Marina
Recreation
7.4.2 REGU L ATlON S
a) Minimum Side and Rear 7.5 metres
Yard
To Amend Bylaw 05-200 to create new Open Space and Parks Zones
Page 7 of 7
b) Minimum Lot Frontage 30 metres
c) Maximum Building Height 11 metres
d) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
e) Minimum Side and Rear 7.5 metres in the case of any building
Yard for Accessory or structure abutting a Residential or
Buildings Institutional Zone
7.5 CONSERVATlONlHAZARD LAND (P5) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Conservation/Hazard Land (P5) Zone for any
purpose other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory
thereto. Such erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed
regulations:
7.5.1 PERMITTED USES Conservation
Flood and Erosion Control Facilities
Recreation, Passive”
9. That Schedule “C”, of By-law 05-200, be amended by adding an
additional special exception as follows:
“3. Notwithstanding Section 7.1.3 d) of this By-law, a building
accessory to Lawn Bowling/Bocce Court(s) shall be permitted to a
maximum gross floor area of 38 square metres.”
10. The Clerk be hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving
of notice of the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Planninq
&t.
ENACTED this 14thd ay of June, 2006.
R-h
liiaiil
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1595 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2G06
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 1596 of Schedule A
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
« « # « Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1597 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. (2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1634 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1635 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
« « • « Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 1676 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
ill
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
|NTERBERRY
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1502 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Ihc. and its licensor . [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1503 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. (2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
limit
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference B -Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1547 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranei Land Information Services Inc. and its licensor . [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map eference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1550 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
IlM l
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1591 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/6/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Repr duced without Permis ion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
ARBUTUS cr
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1454 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
mnetLandfnformation Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1455 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1456 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranef Land Information Services (nc. and its ((censors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS (S NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
# • ® • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1494 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By- aw
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
SEE RURAL MAP 150
Legend
• • « # Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1495 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
SEE RURAL MAP 150
Legend
# • • # Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1496 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
[2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission.
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
# # • « Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1497 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1498 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Ili¦ill
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1500 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1405 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Ma Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1436 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi sion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1437 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its lic nsors. [2006] May Not be Reproduce without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• • • • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1443 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1447 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
lilll
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By- aw
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1449 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Teranet Land /nformation Services (nc. an its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-La
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1451 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] M y Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
[Mill
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1393 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1394 of Schedule A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY



Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-La
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1399 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
D Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1400 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date4/24/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1401 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

MAP 1404 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1349 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranel Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
QU/G[_£y
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1357 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1364 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• • • • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1365 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
D Teranef Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1385 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
liiliil;
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
SOMERVILLE LN
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1386 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Iiiaiil
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu er
By-Law
Legend
• • • • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1387 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Sen/ices Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-La
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
• « # # Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1391 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
B -Law
Bart
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1392 of Schedule '
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
\ * Legend
\ i \
\ -i\ \ #••• Urban Boundary
?.\ \
\ \
\ \
\ \ \
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1339 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
YEVRUS FO NALP A TON SI SIHT .noissimreP tuohtiw decudorpeR eb toN yaM ]6002[ .srosnecil sti dna .cnI secivreS noitamrofnI dnaL tenareT ©
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1341 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Ma Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1342 of Schedule
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. 12006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1344 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
5 Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi sion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1345 of Schedule A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1346 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1347 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1348 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date6/1/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton..
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number By-Law
_
Legend
Urban Boundary
north
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1303 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date6/7/2006
pooej May Not be Reproduced without Pemssion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SU VEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1304 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensor . (2006) May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Teranet Land Information Services Ire. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By- aw
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1306 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensor . [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1311 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc, and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1332 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services he. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
ill
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1333 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Ipc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1334 of Schedule 'A'
Riot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1335 of Schedule
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
\
O C
%o
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1336 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
) Teranet Land Information Services /fie. and its licensors. [2006) May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1291 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1292 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services nc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Repr duced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1293 of Schedule 'A'
Riot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
YEVRUS FO NALP A TON SI SIHT .noissimreP tuohtiw decudorpeR eb toN yaM ]6002[ .srosnecil sti dna .cni secivreS noitamrofnI dnaL tenareT ©
© Teranet Land Information Services nc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1298 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. {2006] May Nol be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1300 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zo ing By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
BATTLEFIELD
Legend
# • • • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 1301 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006) May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
KIN<Sst City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
If K
3S
B 32
« s s s
LESLIE DR
Legend
§- ******* *
Urban Boundary
*t * l * * * * * RIDGE RD < > 0 C * * . j
SEE RURAL MAP 137
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1279 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not b Repr duced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
SEE RURAL MAP 133
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number u ber
By-Law
Legend
• ••« Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1280 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
D Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006) May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1281 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 1283 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranei Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1284 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1286 of Schedule 'A'
Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NOHTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1287 of Schedule A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1288 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Teranet Land Information Services nc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1290 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date4/24/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1247 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1248 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Ini;, and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1249 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1250 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and ts licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THiS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1252 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inb. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1253 of Schedule 'A*
© Teranet Land Information Se vices lr c. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
B -Law
Legend
# Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1256 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Iqc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. 7H/S IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
c Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1259 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
) Teranet Land Information Services lac. and its licensors. (2006) May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OP SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
• ••« Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1260 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services fric. and its licensors. [2Q06J May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
4Pf>i£a/
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1236 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1238 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. T IS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1239 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranei Land Information Services the. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services t e. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. is IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1243 of Schedule 'A'
Riot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services the. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1244 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1245 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Nu ber
By- aw
Legend
• e • • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1207 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• # # • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1227 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/0/2OO6
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1229 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1231 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and Hs licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. IS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1186 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1187 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference B -Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1188 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 1190 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1191 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1193 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Gf*4 D
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1194 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Rep oduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1176 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006) May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
ten imzl SJOW Pue u° l|e '
A3MnSM NVld V10N SI SIHl uom** W P npoJ «, m
LEGEND ct
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1178 of Schedule A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1180 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8 2006
© Teranef Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1182 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/0/2OO6
Teranet Land Information Services inc. a d its licenso . [2006J May Not be Rep oduced without Pe mission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1183 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1184 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1185 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1137 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1142 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1144 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/6/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1145 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Setvices nc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc, and its licensors. 12006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
LAKE ONTARIO Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1150 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
LAKE ONTARIO
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1152 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
ate of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1173 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
MANSFIELD DR
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1174 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-La
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1124 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3 8/2006
Teranel Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
B -Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1125 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1126 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi sion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1128 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/6/2006
Teranet Land Information Services }nc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1132 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Infbnnation Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1133 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licen ors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
ASAbinS do NVld VION SI SIH1 uo/ssiLwad jno«jw» peonpcudey aq ion few [900Z] 'sjosuao sy pue 'out sooiajbs uoijeuuajui puej i9ueje± ©
9002/8/S9}ea {0|d
.V. einpaips i-dVIAl
OOO'S: t 31VOS
H1 0N
MBi- g
jaqiunN jequjnN
p apa
MB - g eoueje y deyy
aAi ayg
MBI-Ag Sujuoz
U0}|!U1BH A*!0
U01|IUIEH
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
north
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1135 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranei Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 1136 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1086 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1087 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
iia i
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1: 3,000
MAP 1088 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduce without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1090 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1091 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1092 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 1093 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Tersnet Land Information Services I c. and s licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 1097 of Schedule A
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Servic s Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1098 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
LAKE ONTARIO
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1050 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
& Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
LAKE ONTARIO
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
HORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1051 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Iq and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
1005
NORTH
SCALE 1 ; 3,000
MAP 1078 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Illllli
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1079 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1080 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1081 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services ipc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1082 of Schedule V
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services lr c. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
iii
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1083 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. TH/S IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 1084 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1085 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2Q06
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1039 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Infbmiation Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
and its licensors. [20061 May Not be Reproduced without Permission. T IS IS NOT A LAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc.
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Servic s Inc. and its licensor . [2006] May Not be R produced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1042 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2Q06
Teranet Land Information Service? inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1043 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1044 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
ate of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1045 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1046 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date3/8/2Q06
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Numb r Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1047 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not ti Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1049 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006J May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS iS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1002 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Servic s Inc. and its licenso s. {2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1003 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranei Land information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
iiaill
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Ma Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1004 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
# Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1005 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference B -Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
*••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1006 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1033 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
NORTH
'¦ SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1035 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1036 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
liMil
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1037 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1038 of Schedule
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without P rmission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 990 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 993 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 994 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 995 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permis ion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number u ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 996 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference B -Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 998 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
5 Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 999 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
3 Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and s licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCA E 1 :3,000
MAP 1000 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and s licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 1001 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 956 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning B -Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By- a
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 957 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/0/2OO6
© Teranet Land I formation Services inc. and its licensors, [2006J May Not be Reproduced witho t Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 961 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2Q06
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 962 of Schedule A'
PlotDate3/8/2Q06
Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map eference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3.000
MAP 983 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
! flUff
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
SEE RURAL MAP 116
Legend
#### Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 984 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and it licensors. [2006] May Not be Rep oduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
H milton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
B - aw
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 985 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permis ion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 989 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
GLEN CT
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 944 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Sendees Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Teranst Land Informa onSeM S!!
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 948 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
s) Teranet Land Information ServicesInc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 950 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8 2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 951 of Schedule 'A'
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 952 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
& Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 953 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date4/18/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 954 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Servicei Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 955 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
) Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. (2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 908 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 909 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not Rep oduced without Permi sion. THIS /S NOT A P N OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 910 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
llWlll
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 911 of Schedule 'A'
MAP 912 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date4/24/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. an its licen ors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Plot Date3 8/2006
U nkm hnS ces Inc. and its licensors. [20061 May Not be Re roduced mfhoul Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 919 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By- aw
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 920 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduc d without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 942 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
ELIZABETH CT
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 943 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi sion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 870 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/20Q6
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Wmi ton
HARBOUR
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
#### Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 871 of Schedule 'A1
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 877 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Sendees he and its licensor . [2006] May Not b Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 899 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduc d without Permission THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Ma Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 900 of Schedule
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Ific. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 901 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 902 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning B -Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 904 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By- aw
1218 FORSYTH AV N
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 906 of Schedule A'
> Land ' Plot Date3/8/?onfi
S ****-- ** be Reproduced wfibnut P '
MAP 907 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi sion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 835 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Rep oduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 859 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLANOFSURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 861 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. (2006] May Not be Reproduc d without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 862 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be R produced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
COOTES PARADISE
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
COOTES PARADISE
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 865 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land information Services Inc and its licensors [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 866 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
b Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
Legend
Urban Boundary
HORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 867 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services In and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Remission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 868 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Lan Information Services inc and its licensors [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
MAP 869 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 818 of Schedule A
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not b Repro uced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
#••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 819 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and s licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
©••« Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 820 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services /n<?. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 823 of Schedule V
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 824 of Schedule A
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-La
: r:'K- Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
..¦¦¦¦ • ...•¦¦ ¦¦ ¦ V-
Legend
® • « • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 825 of Schedule
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and s licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
B -Law
Legend
• ••* Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 826 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and Hs licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi sion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 827 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Sen/ices tnc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Per ission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Remission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
ijillji
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 834 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Remission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
B -Law
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 680 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date4/24/2006
i Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Num er
By-Law
if
Legend
. Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 715 of Schedule A'
Plot Da e3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc, and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• • • • Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 716 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-La
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 743 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranef Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By- aw
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 753 of Schedule A1
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 780 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranei Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
COOTES PARADISE
SEE RURAL MAP 97
Legend
««## Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 784 of Schedule 'A*
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land information Services Inc. and Hs licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number umber
By-Law
Legend
« ® ® Cf Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 785 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Repr duced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
® *•« Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 793 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/6/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. (2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY

Lilli!
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Num er Number
By- aw
Legend
Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 382 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Tsrsnei Land Information Services he. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
SEE RURAL MAP 62
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
.
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 413 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Numb r Nu ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 414 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permis ion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
e
c
«
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 445 of Schedule A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Einm
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
\
NORTH
SCALE 1:3,000
MAP 481 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Serviceslnc. and its licensors. [2006J May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number u ber
By-Law
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 482 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduc d without Permission. T IS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 515 of Schedule'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006} May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Nu ber
By-Law
Legend
• Urban Boundary
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 516 of Schedule 'A'
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permi ion. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY
Hamilton
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Legend
• ••• Urban Boundary
Cty ofBurlhgton
NORTH
SCALE 1 :3,000
MAP 550 of Schedule
Plot Date3/8/2006
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2006] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY



Content from 06199 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 9, Corporate Administration
Committee Report 06-01 1 (FCSO6070)
CM: June 28,2006
Bill No. 199
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-199
TO AMEND THE SEWER USE BY-LAW NO. 04-150, AS AMENDED,
AND IMPLEMENT THE GOODS AND SERVICES TAX-REDUCED 2006
SEWER USE FEES AND CHARGES.
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law 04-150, known and referred to as the “Sewer Use By-law”, which
By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004.
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control:
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2005, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did pass and enact By-law No. 05-378, being a by-law to amend the
Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150, as amended, and implement the 2006 sewer use
fees and charges;
AND WHEREAS the Government of Canada has subsequently reduced the
Goods and Services Tax (“GST”) rate from 7% to 6% effective July 1, 2006 and
thereby resulted in a reduction of the 2006 sewer use fees and charges
AND WHEREAS it is therefore necessary to further amend the Sewer Use By-
law No. 04-150, as amended, to reflect the Goods and Services Tax-reduced
fees and charges contained in this by-law.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
2
1. That Schedule I‘D” to By-law No. 04-15 0, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “D” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force and effect as of
July 1, 2006.
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 04-150, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED A&NiCTED this 12th day o/f July, 2-006. -
t
ty Clerk
\
1“
Mayor
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVE JULY IS2T006,
(REFERRED TO IN SECTIONS 4,7 AND 8)
1. (a) Hauled sewage license fee $220.45
(b) Annual fee permit to discharge hauled sewage $51.79*
2. Permit refund service charge - Sewers $20.71*
3. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
d isch ar ge : discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewaae Vehicle compliant comdiant
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 m’ or
gallons or any part any part thereof $ 39.51* $39.51*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 39.51* $79.02*
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 79.02* $11 8.53*
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $1 18.53* $1 97.54*
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $1 58.02* $237.06*
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10000 imperial m3
gallons
*Includes GST
(b) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated outside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for all discharges
from outside the City:
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant and non-
compliant
up to 1000 imperial up to 4.54 m3o r any part
gallons or any part thereof $79.02*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 15.9 $1 58.03*
less than or equal to m3
3500 imperial gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 22.7 $237.06*
less than or equal to m3
5000 imperial gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 36.3 $395.09*
less than or equal to m3
8000 imperial gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to $474.16*
less than or equal to 45.43 m3
10000 imperial gallons
c) Holding Tanks of Recreational Vehicles $ 5.16*
4. Overstrength Discharge Fees and Compliance Program Fees
Parameter Fee (centdkg)
B.O.D. $0.5946 plus GST
Suspended Solids $0.4757 plus GST
Phenolic Compounds $0.5946 plus GST
Solvent Extractable Matter $0.4994 plus GST
Kjeldahl Nitrogen $1.8106 plus GST
Phosphorus $1 2738 plus GST
*Includes GST
5
5. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $244.28 plus GST
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $244.28 plus GST
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $244.28 plus GST
6. Information Requests $1 12.35 plus GST
t



Content from 06201 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 9, Corporate Administration
Committee Report 06-01 1 (FCSO6070)
CM: June 28,2006
Bill No. 201
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-201
TO AMEND THE WATERWORKS BY-LAW R84-026, AS AMENDED,
AND IMPLEMENT THE GOODS AND SERVICES TAX-REDUCED 2006
WATER FEES AND CHARGES
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law- R84-026, being a by-
law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2005, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of By-law No. 05-379, being a by-law to amend the
Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended, and implement the 2006 water fees
and charges;
AND WHEREAS the Government of Canada has subsequently reduced the
Goods and Services Tax (“GST) rate from 7% to 6% effective July 1, 2006 and
thereby resulted in a reduction of certain 2006 water and wastewater user fees
and charges;
t
2
AND WHEREAS it is therefore necessary to further amend the Waterworks By-
law R84-026, as amended, to reflect the Goods and Services Tax-reduced fees
and charges contained in this by-law.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “E” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “El’ attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force and effect as of
the 1’‘ day of July , 2006.
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
:TED this 12‘h day of July, 2006.
3
S C HE D U L E "E
"
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES
EFFECTIVE JULY 1,2006
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $58.03
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in Section 4(1 )(b) of By-law R84-026,
as amended:
Size of Water Meter Fee
16 mm diameter $287.72
I
20 mm diameter $328.26
25 mm diameter $537.59
38 mm diameter $824.56
50 mm diameter $998.65
100 mm diameter (turbine) $2,460.62
I
100 mm diameter (compound) $4,249.37
100 mm diameter (fire service compound) $10 ,540.44
150 mm diameter (turbine) $4,271.87
I
150 mm diameter (compound) $8,435.94
150 mm diameter (fire service compound) $13 ,460.87
200 mm diameter (turbine) $6,169.37
I
200 mm diameter (fire service compound) $18,377.12
250 mm diameter and above cost+ 33%
Overhead
4
2. (a) Permit refund service charge - water * $24.54
(b) Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 33% Overhead
3. For superintending the laying of a new water service
(a) Regular Inspection - during normal working hours $55.09
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $55.09
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
(c) Regular Inspection - after normal working hours $82.64
4. Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee:**
(a) Service replacement of public portion from Omm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $230.70
(b) Inspection of private portion of service replacement from
Omm to and including 20mm $17 1.91
5. For turning water off $55.09
6. For turning water on $55.09
7. For turning water on & off during the same call $82.64
8. For each Special Water Service to be connected as
referred to in Section 4(18) of this By-law $2,663.31
9. Discharge of Special Water Service Agreements $314 .68
10. Processing of Special Water Service Agreements $444.1 8
11. Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes $82.64
12. For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):***
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnection fee
(a) Connection/Disconnection Fee - normal working hours $15 9.1 9/visit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee - after normal working hours $238.78/visit
(c) Additional per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental $10 .001day
5
13. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter:
Size of Meter cost 8% PST& Total
6% GST
16 mm diameter $ 112.80 $ 15.79 $ 128.59
I I I
20 mm diameter $ 166.72 $ 23.34 $ 190.06
I I I
25 mm diameter $ 206.79 $ 28.95 $ 235.74
I I I
38 mm diameter $ 461.24 $ 64.57 $ 525.81
50 mm diameter $ 615.59 $ 86.18 $ 701.77
100 mm diameter (turbine) $ 1,911.88 $ 267.66 $ 2,179.54
100 mm diameter $3,456.67 $ 483.93 $ 3,940.60
(compound)
I I I
101 mm diameter (fire $9,034.76 $ 1,264.87 $ 10,299.63
service compound)
I I I
150 mm diameter (turbine) $3,517.85 $ 492.50 $ 4,010.35
150 mm diameter $7,168.77 $ 1,003.63 $ 8,172.40
(compound)
150 mm diameter (fire $11,624.20 $ 1,627.39 $ 13,251.59
service compound)
200 mm diameter (turbine) $ 5,200.30 $ 728.04 $ 5,928.34
200 mm diameter (fire $15 ,983.28 $2,237.66 $ 18,220.94
service compound)
-
>250 mm diameter (all Cost + 33% cost + 33%
types) overhead overhead plus
PST and GST
14. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
11 I II
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $93.25
11 I II
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $142.45
11 I II
100 mm plus diameter $325.95
I/ I/
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) cost +33%
overhead
i
6
15. For service calls other than previously specified:
(a) Service Call - during normal working hours $55.09
(b) Service Call - after normal working hours $82.64
16. Meter Open By-pass $325.00
17. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
18. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge Cost PIUS 33%
overhead
19. Processing of Landscaping Lease Arrangements $412 .94
20. Rental Rate for Landscaping Lease (Per Annum) Case Dependent
No set fee
21. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - No Field Inspection $73.91
22. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - Field Inspection $202.9 1
23. General Administration Fees
Replacement of lost cards for water filling stations $40.00
Account Review $73.91
General Request (per hour) $36.96
*
A service charge applies for each refund issued.
**
Additional fees will apply for service size upgrades based on size and length
***
This service requires a $5250.00 deposit ($250.00 usage deposit and
$5000.00 damage deposit)



Content from 06228 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 10, Committee of the Whole
Report 06-016 (PW04050b)
CM: July 12,2006
Bill No. 228
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-228
TO AMEND THE SEWER USE BY-LAW 04-150, AS AMENDED, BY
AMENDING AND ADDING CERTAIN PARAMETERS AND ASSOCIATED
DISCHARGE LIMITS.
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law 04-1 50, known and referred to as the “Sewer Use By-law”, which
By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004.
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of July, 2006, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 10 of Committee of the Whole Report 06-016 and
did authorize the amendment and addition of certain parameters and associated
discharge limits in the Sewer Use By-law as set out herein;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That section 1 of By-law No. 04-1 50, as amended, be further amended by
adding the following subsection l(ddd) and by relettering the current sub-
(m) (m)
sections (ddd), (eee) and as sub-sections (eee), and (ggg)
respectively:
(ddd) “Total PAHs” means the total of all the polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons listed under the Canada Ontario Agreement Tier I
and Tier II Substance Lists, i.e. anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene,
benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(e)pyrene, benzo(b)fluoranthene,
benzo(j)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, benzo(g,h,i)perylene,
chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, dibenzo(a,i)pyrene,
dibenzo(a,j)acridine, 7H-dibenzo(c,g)carbazole, dinitropyrene,
fluoranthene, indeno( 1,2,3-c,d)pyrene, perylene, phenanthrene and
pyrene, as determined by Standard Methods;
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150, as amended, by amending
and adding certain Parameters and Associated Discharge Limits
2. That subclause 4(1)2.(p) of By-law No. 04-150, as amended, be repealed
and that the following be substituted therefor:
(P) sewage containing any of the following in excess of the indicated
concentrations:
1500 milliarams/litre
Chlorides expressed as CI
Sulphates expressed as SO4
50 miI Ii a ramdli t re
Aluminum expressed as Al
Iron expressed as Fe
10 milliarams/litre
Fluorides expressed as F
5 milliarams/litre
Antimony expressed as Sb
Bismuth expressed as Bi
Chromium expressed as Cr
Cobalt expressed as Co
Manganese expressed as Mn
Silver expressed as Ag
Tin expressed as Sn
Titanium expressed as Ti
Vanadium expressed as V
3 miI I i a rams/li t re
Zinc expressed as Zn
2 mi llia rams/litre
Cyanide (total) expressed as CN
Copper expressed as Cu
Lead expressed as Pb
Nickel expressed as Ni
1 mi I lia ram/lit re
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150, as amended, by amending
and adding certain Parameters and Associated Discharge Limits
Arsenic expressed as As
Molybdenum expressed as Mo
Selenium expressed as Se
0.7 milligrams/litre
Cadmium expressed as Cd
0.0 1 miI I i gr a ms/li t re
Mercury expressed as Hg
3. That section 4 of By-law No. 04-150, as amended, be further amended by
adding the following subclause 4(1)2.(t):
(t) sewage containing any of the following in excess of the indicated
concentrations:
I I I
Aldrin/Dieldrin 0.0002 milligrams/litre
Benzene 0.01 milligrams/litre
Bis(2-ethylhexy1)phthalate 0.012 milligrams/litre
Chlordane 0.1 miI I i gr ams /l it re
Chloroform 0.04 miI I i a ramdli t re
I I I
Trictjoroethylene 0.4 miI I i gr ams/Ii t re
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-1 50, as amended, by amending
and adding certain Parameters and Associated Discharge Limits
4. That clause 4(8)(c) of By-law No. 04-150, as amended, be repealed and
the following substituted therefor:
(c) the discharge contains a concentration of less than 0.001
milligrams/litre of PCBs; and
5. That this by-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
6. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 04-150, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this gthd ay of August, 2006.



Content from 06243 hamilton sign bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 16, Planning and Economic
Development Committee
Report: 06-014 (PED05172(b))
CM: August 9,2006
Bill No. 243
CITY OF HAMILTON
,
BY-LAW NO. 06-243
A By-Law Respecting Signs And Other Advertising Devices Within The City Of Hamilton
WHEREAS subsection 5(3) of the Municipal Acf, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, provides that a
municipal power shall be exercised by by-law;
AND WHEREAS section 8 of the Municipal Acf, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, provides that a
municipality has the capacity, rights, powers and privileges of a natural person for the purpose of
exercising its authority under that or any other Act;
AND WHEREAS subsection 9(1) of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, provides
that section 8 of that Act shall be interpreted broadly so as to confer broad authority on
municipalities to enable them to govern their affairs as they consider appropriate, and to enhance
their ability to respond to municipal issues;
AND WHEREAS subsection 11(1), paragraph 1 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.
25, authorizes the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws respecting highways over which it has
jurisdiction;
AND WHEREAS subsection 11(1), paragraph 7 of the Municipal Acf, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.
25, authorizes the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws respecting signs;
AND WHEREAS subsection 9(3) of the Municipal Acf, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, provides
that a by-law under section 11 of that Act respecting a matter may regulate or prohibit and, as
part of the power to regulate or prohibit may require a person to do things, provide for a system of
licences permits, approvals or registrations and impose conditions as a requirement of obtaining,
continuing to hold or renewing a licence, permit, approval or registration;
AND WHEREAS subsection 63(1) of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, authorizes
the City of Hamilton, if it passes a by-law for prohibiting or regulating the placing of an object on a
highway, to provide for the removal of any object placed on a highway in contravention of that by-
law;
Sign By-law
Page 2 of 39
AND WHEREAS subsection 99.3 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, authorizes
the City of Hamilton to enter land and pull down or remove an advertising device, at the expense
of the owner of the advertising device, if it is erected, located, or displayed in contravention of a
by-law respecting advertising devices, including signs;
AND WHEREAS subsections 427(1) and 427(3) of Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25,
authorize the City of Hamilton, if it has authority by by-law or otherwise, to direct or require that a
matter or thing be done, to direct in the same by-law that, in default of it being done by the person
directed or required to do it, such matter or thing be done at the person’s expense and to recover
that expense by action or by adding it to the tax roll and collecting it in the same manner as taxes;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, establishes that
any person who contravenes any by-law of the City of Hamilton is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS public notice, including notice of a public participation meeting held by
the Planning and Economic Development Committee on the 22nd day of June, 2006, of the
intention to pass this By-law was given on the 2nd day of June, 2006 and the gth day of June,
2006 pursuant to subsection 99.1 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, by publishing the
public notice in local newspapers;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
PART 1.0
TITLE, SCOPE AND INTENT OF SIGN BY-LAW
1 .I TITLE
This By-law shall be known and cited as the “Hamilton Sign By-law”.
1.2 SCOPE
1.2.1 This By-law shall regulate the location, size, number, construction, alteration, repair
and maintenance of all signs and advertising devices within the geographic
boundaries of the City of Hamilton.
1.2.2 All schedules attached to this By-law form part of this By-law.
1.2.3 All signs and advertising devices located on public and private Property within the
geographic boundaries of the City of Hamilton are subject to the provisions of this
By-law.
Sign By-law
Page 3 of 39
1.2.4 This By-law does not apply to signs erected, located, or displayed, or caused to be
erected, located, or displayed by federal, provincial or municipal governments, the
Conservation Authorities or a local board as defined in the Municipal Act, 2001,
including, but not limited to, signs designating a public library, a public community
centre, a public arena, signs required by the City of Hamilton to inform the public of
planning applications submitted under the Planning Act and TODs signs.
1.2.5 Notwithstanding subsection 1.2.4, the applicable regulations under this By-law for
Ground Signs or Wall Signs shall apply to signs that function as Ground Signs or Wall
Signs.
1.3 INTENT
The purpose of this By-law is to regulate signs in the City of Hamilton with the intent
of authorizing signs that:
(a) are appropriate in size, number, and location to the type of activity or use to
which they pertain;
(b) provide reasonable and appropriate means for the public to locate and identify
facilities, businesses, and services without difficulty or confusion;
(c) are compatible with their surroundings;
(d) protect and enhance the aesthetic qualities and visual character of the City of
Hamilton;
(e) are consistent with the City of Hamilton’s planning, urban design and heritage
objectives;
(f) do not create a distraction or safety hazard for pedestrians or motorists;
(9) minimize adverse impacts on nearby public and private property;
(h) regulate signs while impairing the public’s right to expression as little as possible
and in proportion to the purpose of the By-law.
PART 2.0
DEFINITIONS
In this By-law:
“Advertising Device” means any device or object erected, located, or displayed so
as to attract public attention to any goods or services or facilities or events and
includes flags, banners, pennants, and lights.
“Animated Sign” means a video screen or any flashing, kinetic, or illusionary
motion of all or any part of a Sign and includes a rotating Sign but does not include
an Electronic Message Display.
Sign By-law
Page 4 of 39
“Authorized Sign” means any Sign placed or erected on a highway under the
authority of By-law 01-215, the City of Hamilton Traffic By-law, for the purpose of
regulating, warning or guiding traffic.
“Awning Sign” means a retractable structure, covered with fabric or like material
that is attached and projects from the exterior wall of a building over a window or
door and provides shade or other protection from the elements and that is or
functions as a Sign.
“Banner” means a Sign or an Advertising Device made from cloth, plastic or a
similar lightweight non-rigid material.
“Bed and Breakfast Sign” means a Sign identifying a bed and breakfast
establishment.
“Billboard” means an outdoor Sign erected, located or displayed by a Person
engaged in the sale or rental of the space on the Sign, upon which space is
displayed Copy that advertises goods, products, or services not sold or offered on
the Property where the Sign is erected, located, or displayed, and the Sign is either
single faced or double faced.
“Business Improvement Area” means an area designated by the City of Hamilton
as an improvement area under the Municipal Act, 2001.
“Campaign Office” means the actual building or portion of a building in which a
candidate maintains his office for the purpose of running an election campaign.
“Canopy Sign” means a non-retractable awning or roof-like structure that is not
supported from the ground but instead is attached to and supported from the
exterior wall of a building and that is or functions as a Sign.
“Charity” means a registered charity as defined in the Income Tax Act (Canada) or
successor legislation, which has a registration number issued by the Canada
Revenue Agency, or successor agency.
“Chief Building Official” means the person and/or his or her designate so
appointed by Council pursuant to the Building Code Act, 1992.
“Community Organization” means a non-profit group of persons organized for the
advancement of a civic, cultural or recreational nature.
“Construction Information Sign” means a Sign which identifies or provides
information relating to or advertising the development or the construction of a
Sign By-law
Page 5 of 39
building on the Property on which the Sign is erected, located, or displayed but does
not include a New Home Development Ground Sign.
“Copy” means the graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or
removable letter, pictorial; symbolic, or numeric form.
“Council” means the Council of the City of Hamilton.
“Designated Utility Pole” means a utility pole, including a light standard,
designated by the City of Hamilton and fitted with a Poster Sleeve.
“Designated Official” means an employee of the City of Hamilton who has been
assigned the responsibility of administering and enforcing this By-law, or his
designate.
“Directional Sign” means any Sign on a Property which gives directions or
instructions for the control of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and shall include an
entry and exit Sign.
“Driveway Line” means the line forming a boundary between that portion of a
Property not normally used by vehicular traffic and the lateral limit of a driveway.
“Election Sign” means a Sign advertising or promoting the election of a political
party or a candidate for public office in a federal, provincial or municipal election.
“Electronic Message Display” means a permanent Sign which is electronically
controlled and which displays information in a prearranged sequence, and on which
the intensity of illumination is maintained at a constant level.
“Facade” means the entire building wall including a parapet.
“Frontage” means the length of the Property Line of any one Property parallel to
and along each legally accessible Street.
“Grade” means the average surface elevation of the finished ground below a Sign
or which is in contact with a Ground Sign.
“Ground Sign” means a Sign which is free standing and is supported by a
structure secured to the ground and which is not supported by any building or other
structure.
“Home Occupation Sign” means a Sign identifying a home occupation as defined
in the zoning by-laws of the City of Hamilton.
i
Sign By-law
Page 6 of 39
“Height” means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the
Grade immediately below a Sign to the highest point of the Sign and includes any
support structure or ornamental feature.
“Incidental Sign” means a Sign containing information that has a purpose
incidentally related to the use or occupancy of a Property and which Sign is
intended to assist the public with the location of business facilities or provides
courtesy or directional information but is not an advertisement.
“Inflatable Sign” means a Sign or an Advertising Device filled with air or gas and
tethered to the ground, a vehicle or any structure and shall include balloons and any
other inflatable Advertising Device.
“Information Sign” means a Sign for public safety or convenience regulating
traffic, parking or other functional subdivision of the Property or a Sign denoting
sections of a building and bearing no commercial advertising.
“Marquee Sign” means a permanent canopy or a roof-like structure, often bearing a
signboard, projecting or extending from the faqade, over an entrance and that is or
functions as a Sign.
“Mobile Sign” means a Sign that is temporary, designed for the rearrangement of
Copy on the sign face, is capable of being readily moved from one location to
another, and may be part of or attached to a wheeled trailer or frame without
wheels.
“Mural” means any type of display or artistic endeavour applied as paint, film or
any other covering to any external wall or other integral part of a building or
structure which does not include any words or advertisement or any other
promotional message or content, including logos or trademarks.
“New Home Development Ground Sign” means a Sign that advertises the sale of
Properties and homes of a subdivision but not the developer’s or landowner‘s
business in general.
“New Home Development Portable Sign” means a non-illuminated Sign which is
not permanently installed or affixed to the ground and where the purpose of the
Sign is to direct attention to the sale of new home developments.
“Official Sign” means any Sign required by a federal or provincial statute or
regulation or by a municipal by-law and shall include a traffic sign, street name sign
and a permanent sign erected, located, or displayed on a Street to inform the public
of the location of Business Improvement Areas, public buildings, hospitals, public
libraries, institutions, places of worship, parks, recreational or educational facilities.
Sign By-law
Page 7 of 39
“Open House Directional Sign” means a temporary portable sign intended to
direct traffic to a residence for sale or lease, but does not include a New Home
Development Portable Sign.
“Owner” means the registered owner of the Property, or the Person or the Person’s
authorized agent in lawful control of a Property.
“Parapet Sign” means a Sign attached to the parapet of a building.
“Person” means any individual, association, proprietorship, partnership, syndicate,
company, corporation, firm, business, authorized agent, trustee and the heirs,
executors or other legal representatives, or any combination of the foregoing.
“Portable Sign” means a free standing moveable sign not fastened by any means
to the ground or any structure.
“Poster” means a printed notice conveying information intended to be displayed for
a temporary period of time and includes but is not limited to a bill, handbill, leaflet,
notice or placard.
“Poster Sleeve” means a collar or other protective covering or identifier fitted by
the City of Hamilton to a Designated Utility Pole.
“Projecting Sign” means a Sign attached to a building and projecting out
horizontally from a building at a right angle to the building.
“Property” means a parcel of land which can be legally conveyed pursuant to the
Planning Act and includes any buildings and structures thereon.
“Property Line” means the legal boundaries of a Property and includes a Street
Line.
“Readograph” means that part of a permanent Sign composed of changeable
letters intended to convey a temporary message and which is designed or
constructed so that the message on the Sign may be easily changed and
rearranged mechanically or as part of an Electronic Message Display.
“Real Estate Sign” means a temporary non-illuminated Sign displayed on Property
and advertising the sale, rent, or lease of the Property.
“Roof Sign” means a Sign supported entirely or partly by the roof of a building or
structure which projects above the roof and parapet or is erected, located or
displayed on a sloped roof.
Sign By-law
Page 8 of 39
“Sidewalk Sign” means a freestanding Sign which is typically shaped like an “A” or
a “T” and has one or two sign faces.
“Sign” means any surface, structure and other component parts, which are used or
capable of being used as a visual medium or display to attract attention to a specific
subject matter for identification, information or advertising purposes and includes an
Advertising Device.
“Sign Area” means the entire area of the surface of a Sign including the border or
frame, together with any material forming an integral part of the background of the
display or used to differentiate the Sign from the backdrop or building against which
it is erected, located, or displayed. Where there is no border or the Sign is
composed of individually installed letters, numerals or shapes, the Sign Area shall
include all of the area of the smallest polygon containing a maximum of eight right
angle sides that enclose the surface of the Sign or the grouping of letters, numerals
or shapes.
“Sign Owner” means any Person described on the Sign, or whose name and
address or telephone number appears on the Sign, or who installed the Sign, or
who is in lawful control of the Sign, or who benefits from the message on the Sign,
and for the purposes of this definition, there may be more than one Sign Owner.
“Street” means any public highway but does not include a provincial highway.
“Street Furniture” means all Street related amenities and includes benches,
kiosks, telephone booths, newspaper boxes, mail boxes, clocks, street lighting,
transit shelters, litter containers, clothing recycling collection boxes, bicycle racks,
tree guards, planters and other similar privately or publicly owned features.
“Street Line” means the dividing line between a Property and a Street.
“Temporary Personal Sign” means a non-illuminated Sign displaying a personal
announcement or congratulatory message.
“Use” when used in conjunction with the words zone, residential, employment,
industrial, commercial, institutional, agricultural, open space, or similar words, shall
mean such uses as may be permitted under the zoning by-laws of the City of
Hamilton.
“Vacant” means a Property separately assessed that does not have any building or
any occupied building thereon.
Sign By-law
Page 9 of 39
“Validation Marker” means an attachment issued by the City of Hamilton signifying
the issuance of a valid Sign permit.
“Visibility Triangle” means the triangular space formed within a Property by the
intersection of the Street Line and a Driveway Line or the projections thereof and a
straight line connecting them 6.0 metres from their point of intersection.
“Wall Sign” means a Sign erected, located, or displayed on or against a wall of a
building, or supported by or through a wall of a building and having the sign face
thereof on a plane approximately parallel to the plane of such wall.
“Width” means the measurement taken at right angles to the Height.
“Window Sign” means a Sign painted, etched, or attached to the interior or
exterior surface of a window which is intended to be seen from off the Property.
“Zone” means any land use zone established in the zoning by-laws of the City of
Hamilton and passed under the Planning Act or any predecessor or successor Act.
PART 3.0
INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION
3. I In t e r pret a t io n
3.1 .I Words importing the singular number or the masculine gender only include more
Persons, parties or things of the same kind than one, and females as well as males
and the converse.
3.1.2 A word interpreted in the singular number has a corresponding meaning when used
in the plural.
3.1.3 The word “shall” is mandatory and the word “may” is permissive.
3.2 Ad m i ni st rat io n
3.2.1 The Designated Official shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement
of this By-law on all public and private Property within the geographic boundaries of
the City of Hamilton.
3.2.2 The Designated Official may enter upon any Property at any reasonable time to
inspect a Sign for the purpose of determining or affecting its compliance with this
By-law.
Sign By-law
Page 10 of 39
3.3 Permits
3.3.1 Every Person erecting, locating or displaying a Sign within the City of Hamilton, with
the exception of a Sign listed in Schedule “B”, shall apply for and obtain a permit.
3.3.2 Every Person applying for a Sign permit shall provide to the Designated Official:
(a) a completed application form as prescribed by the City of Hamilton;
(b) all plans, drawings and other materials as required by the City of Hamilton;
(c) all applicable permit fees as set out in Schedule “A;
(d) the written authorisation of the Owner where the Person applying for the Sign
permit is not also the Owner of the Property where the Sign will be erected,
located, or displayed; and,
(e) where applicable, proof of approval for the proposed Sign from all
governmental authorities having jurisdiction.
3.3.3 An application for a Sign permit shall be accompanied by plans and drawings that
contain the following information:
(a) a key map showing the location of the Property on which the proposed Sign
is to be located and the nearest major Street intersection;
(b) a site plan showing the Property where the Sign is to be erected, located, or
displayed, drawn to scale showing the dimensions of all Property Lines,
existing or proposed buildings, location of proposed Signs, and location of all
existing Signs on the same Property;
(c) drawings and specifications of the Sign drawn to scale and showing
sections and elevations of the Sign to be erected, located, or displayed,
construction details, supporting framework, foundations, materials,
illumination details, Height of Sign, Sign Area, length and Width of Sign; and,
(d) sufficient information for the Chief Building Official to determine that the Sign
has been designed and will be constructed in compliance with the applicable
structural and fire prevention provisions of the Ontario Building Code.
3.3.4 The Chief Building Official may require the certification by a Registered Professional
Engineer of all plans and specifications covering the erection of the Sign and
supporting framework with respect to the structural adequacy of the Sign.
3.3.5 The application of the Ontario Building Code to any sign permit application will be
considered by the City and where the City determines that the Ontario Building
Code applies to a Sign, any sign permit issued pursuant to this By-law will be
deemed to satisfy the requirements for a building permit under the Ontario Building
Code Act.
3.3.8 If required, a Person shall obtain approval for the proposed Sign from other
governmental authorities having jurisdiction.
I
Sign By-law
Page 11 of 39
3.4 Sign Permit Refusal, Expiry, or Renewal
3.4.1 A permit may be refused if the proposed Sign does not comply with this By-law, any
.
other By-law or federal or provincial statute or regulation.
3.4.2 A Billboard, Awning Sign, Canopy Sign, Ground Sign, Marquee Sign, New Home
Development Ground Sign, Parapet Sign, Projecting Sign, or Wall Sign permit
issued by the City of Hamilton shall expire six months from the date of issuance
unless the Sign is erected, located, or displayed for its intended purpose and a
permit shall expire upon the removal of the Sign.
3.4.3 Where a Billboard, Awning Sign, Canopy Sign, Ground Sign, Marquee Sign, New
Home Development Ground Sign, Parapet Sign, Projecting Sign or Wall Sign permit
has been issued and before it has expired, an application may be made to extend
the permit for a further six months, provided the Sign continues to conform to all By-
law requirements and federal or provincial statutory or regulatory requirements
existing at the time of renewal.
3.4.4 The City of Hamilton may revoke a permit under the following circumstances:
(a) the City of Hamilton issued the permit in error;
(b) the Sign does not comply with this By-law or any other by-law, the Ontario
Building Code, or any federal or provincial statute or regulation;
(c) the City of Hamilton issued the permit as the result of false, mistaken,
incorrect, or misleading statements, information, or undertakings on the
application;
(d) the erection, location, or display of the Sign has not commenced within six
months after the issuance of the permit;
(e) the erection, location or display of the Sign, in the opinion of the Designated
Official, has been substantially suspended or discontinued for a period of
more than one calendar year;
(f) the permit holder requests in writing that the permit be revoked; or
(9) the business, product, activity or service to which the Sign relates ceases to
operate or is no longer available.
3.5 Existing Signs
3.5.1 Any Sign that is lawfully erected, located, or displayed on the day this By-law comes
into force may continue to be erected, located, or displayed provided it is not
substantially altered in a manner that would bring it into non-compliance or increase
its non-compliance with this By-law. Anything done to preserve the condition of a
Sign By-law
Page 12 of 39
Sign or to prevent the deterioration of a Sign, including the restoration of a Sign by
removing or replacing worn out, missing, damaged or broken parts, or a change in
the message or Copy displayed by the Sign does not in itself constitute a
substantial alteration.
3.6 Refunds
3.6.1 Subject to subsections 3.6.2 and 3.6.3, the Designated Official shall determine the
amount of the fees, if any, that may be refunded in accordance with Schedule “A”
where:
(a) the Sign permit applicant requests in writing that the Sign Permit application be
cancelled;
(b) the Designated Official refuses to issue the Sign permit because the Sign does
not comply with this By-law or any other by-law, the Ontario Building Code, or
any federal or provincial statute or regulation; or
(c) the City of Hamilton issued the permit in error.
3.6.2 There shall be no refund where:
(a) the City of Hamilton issued the permit as the result of false, mistaken, incorrect,
or misleading statements, information, or undertakings on the application; or
(b) the Sign, for which the permit application is made, has been erected, located or
displayed prior to the issuance of a permit.
3.6.3 Refunds shall only be provided for Ground Sign, New Home Development Ground
Sign, Awning Sign, Canopy Sign, Marquee Sign, Parapet Sign, Projecting Sign and
Wall Sign permit applications.
PART 4.0
GENERAL PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS
4.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display or cause to be erected, located, or display
a Sign:
(a) for which a permit has not been obtained, if a permit is required under this
By -l aw ;
(b) which is not in compliance with this By-law or the conditions of any variance
granted under this By-law;
(c) listed in Schedule “B” which is not in compliance with any regulation listed
in the Schedule for that sign type;
Sign By-law
Page 13 of 39
listed in Schedule “C” which is not in compliance with any regulation listed in
the Schedule for that sign type;
which is not specifically permitted under this By-law;
which is on City of Hamilton Property except as permitted by this By-law;
which obstructs the view of any pedestrian or driver of a motor vehicle,
obstructs the visibility of any traffic sign or device, or interferes with vehicular
traffic in a manner that could endanger any person;
which illuminates any adjacent Property or the path of vehicular traffic;
which is not maintained in a proper state of repair, becomes unsightly,
becomes structurally inadequate or faulty, or could be hazardous to a
pedestrian or motorist;
which the Designated Official has directed be removed; or,
which bears or displays the City of Hamilton logo, crest or seal in whole or in
part, without the express written permission of the City of Hamilton.
4.2 A Person shall be deemed to be erecting, locating, or displaying a Sign if that
Person is the Sign Owner and directs, permits or fails to stop the erection, location,
or display of the Sign.
PART 5.0
REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR TYPES OF SIGNS
5.1 Prohibited Signs
5.1 .I The following Signs are prohibited under this By-law:
(a) any flashing or Animated Sign, with the exception of an Electronic Message
Display as permitted under this By-law;
(b) any Projecting Sign except as permitted under this By-law;
any Roof Sign;
(d) any Sign erected, located, or displayed within a Visibility Triangle;
(e) any Sign displayed on a vehicle, trailer or truck which is parked or located on
Property in a manner that is unrelated to its normal use as a vehicle and is
more consistent with the use of the vehicle as a Sign; or,
(f) any Sign which obstructs or is erected, located, or displayed in a parking
space required by the zoning by-laws of the City of Hamilton.
5.1.2 Where a Sign is not expressly permitted by this By-law, it shall be deemed to be
prohibited.
Sign By-law
Page 14 of 39
5.1.3 Where a type of Sign is not specifically permitted within a particular Zone or on a
Property with a particular zoned use under Schedule “C”, it shall be deemed to be
prohibited within that Zone or on that Property.
5.1.4 Notwithstanding subsections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 and subject to the approval of Council,
Signs on Street Furniture erected, located or displayed pursuant to an agreement
with the City of Hamilton are permitted.
5.2 Ground Signs
5.2.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Ground Sign except in accordance with
the applicable regulations under Schedule “C”, the applicable general regulations
under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the By-law.
5.2.2 No Ground Sign shall be erected, located or displayed except a Ground Sign
embedded in a foundation in the ground to a depth of at least 1.2 metres.
5.2.3 No Ground Sign shall be erected, located or displayed in a commercial or industrial
Zone without displaying on the top or bottom the municipal address number of the
Property on which the Ground Sign is erected, located, or displayed in numerals
that are a minimum height of 15.0 centimetres.
5.2.4 No Ground Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed within 15.0 metres of a
traffic signal or traffic control device.
5.2.5 No Ground Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed within 1.5 metres or a
distance equal to 75% of the Height of the Ground Sign, whichever is greater, from
any Property Line.
5.2.6 The maximum total Sign Area for a Ground Sign that is double faced or multi-faced
Sign shall be double the maximum Sign Area permitted for one sign face.
5.2.7 The sign face of a Ground Sign may allocate a maximum 50% of the sign face to a
Readograph or Electronic Message Display.
5.2.8 No message displayed on an Electronic Message Display on a Ground Sign shall
be displayed for less than three (3) seconds, during which there shall be no
movement or change in colour or intensity of illumination.
5.2.9 A Ground Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed along the same Street
Frontage used to calculate the maximum Sign Area of the Ground Sign.
Sign By-law
Page 15 of 39
5.2.1 0 Where more than one Ground Sign is erected, located, or displayed parallel to a
Street Frontage, no Ground Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed within 200.0
metres of another Ground Sign on the same Property.
5.2.1 1 A Ground Sign shall be permitted in all zones except where the use of the property
is for one or more of the following uses:
(a) A Single Detached Dwelling;
(b) A Semi Detached Dwelling;
(c) A Duplex;
(d) A Triplex;
(e) A Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(f) A Street townhouse;
(9) A Mobile Home;
(h) A Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(i) A Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(j) A Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(k) An Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.2.1 2 Where a Property on which a Billboard is erected, located, or displayed ceases to
be Vacant or undeveloped and the Billboard has not been removed, no Ground
Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed on the Property.
5.3 Wall Signs and Parapet Signs
5.3.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Wall Sign or a Parapet Sign except in
accordance the applicable regulations under Schedule “C”, the applicable general
regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the
By -l aw .
5.3.2 No Wall Sign or Parapet Sign shall extend beyond the extremity of the wall Facade
on which it is erected, located, or displayed.
5.3.3 No Wall Sign or Parapet Sign shall project more than 60 centimetres from the wall
to which it is attached.
5.3.4 No Wall Sign or Parapet Sign erected, located, or displayed on a building above a
location where the public passes shall be erected, located, or displayed less than
2.5 metres above the Grade below the Wall Sign or Parapet Sign.
5.3.5 No Wall Sign or Parapet Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed unless it is
parallel to the wall to which it is attached.
Sign By-law
Page 16 of 39
5.3.6 No Wall Sign shall be erected, located or displayed unless it is on the same building
Facade used to calculate the maximum Sign Area of the Wall Sign.
5.3.7 The sign face of a Wall Sign may be a Read-0-graph or Electronic Message
Display.
5.3.8 No message displayed on an Electronic Message Display on a Wall Sign shall be
displayed for less than three (3) seconds, during which there shall be no movement
or change in colour or intensity of illumination.
5.3.9 No Parapet Sign shall be erected, located or displayed unless it is on the same
building FaGade used to calculate the maximum Sign Area of the Parapet Sign.
5.3.1 0 In a multi-occupant building the area of a Wall Sign for tenants shall be in direct
proportion to the linear distance each occupant controls on the applicable Facade.
5.3.1 1 A Parapet Sign shall consist only of a business’s logo or name.
5.3.12 A Wall Sign or a Parapet Sign shall be permitted in all zones except where the use
of the property is for one or more of the following uses:
(a) A Single Detached Dwelling;
(b) A Semi Detached Dwelling;
(c) A Duplex;
(d) A Triplex;
(e) A Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(f) A Street townhouse;
(9) A Mobile Home
(h) A Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(i) A Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(j) A Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(k) An Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.4 Projecting Signs
5.4.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Projecting Sign except in accordance
with the applicable regulations under Schedule “C”, the applicable general
regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the
By-I a w .
5.4.2 The Owner of Property where a Projecting Sign is erected, located, or displayed
that overhangs a public right of way under the jurisdiction of the City of Hamilton
shall enter into an encroachment agreement with the City of Hamilton and shall
satisfy the City of Hamilton’s requirements for liability insurance. r
Sign By-law
Page 17 of39
5.4.3 No portion of a Projecting Sign shall be less than 2.5 metres above the Grade below
the Projecting Sign.
5.4.4 The sign face of a Projecting Sign may be a Read-0-graph or Electronic Message
Display.
5.4.5 No message displayed on an Electronic Message Display on a Projecting Sign shall
be displayed for less than three (3) seconds, during which there shall be no
movement or change in colour or intensity of illumination.
5.5 Awning Signs, Canopy Signs and Marquee Signs
5.5.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display an Awning Sign, Canopy Sign or Marquee
Sign except in accordance the applicable regulations under Schedule “C”, the
applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under
this section of the By-law.
5.5.2 No Awning Sign, Canopy Sign or Marquee Sign erected, located, or displayed on a
building above a location where the public passes shall be erected, located, or
displayed less than 2.5 metres above the Grade below the Awning Sign, Canopy
Sign or Marquee Sign.
5.5.3 An Awning Sign, Canopy Sign or Marquee Sign shall be permitted in all zones
except where the use of the property is for one or more of the following uses:
(a) A Single Detached Dwelling;
(b) A Semi Detached Dwelling;
(c) A Duplex;
(d) A Triplex;
(e) A Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(f) A Street townhouse;
(9) A Mobile Home
(h) A Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(i) A Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(j) A Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(k) An Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.6 Mobile Signs
5.6.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Mobile Sign except in accordance with
the applicable regulations under Schedule “C”, the applicable general regulations
under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the By-law.
Sign By-law
Page 18 of 39
5.6.2 A permit for a Mobile Sign shall be valid for a period of fourteen (14) consecutive
days.
5.6.3 No more than six (6) Mobile Sign permits shall be issued for a single business at a
single Property in a calendar year for a total calendar year allotment of twelve (12)
weeks.
5.6.4 The maximum display period for a Mobile Sign shall be twenty-eight (28)
consecutive days, being two (2) permit periods.
5.6.5 Where one (1) permit for a Mobile Sign has been issued for a Property for a display
period of fourteen (14) consecutive days, being one (1) permit period, no
subsequent permit for the Property shall be issued until at least fourteen (14) days
have elapsed from the date of expiry of the previous permit.
5.6.6 Where two (2) permits for a Mobile Sign has been issued for a Property for a display
period of twenty-eight (28) consecutive days, being two (2) permit periods, no
subsequent permit for the Property shall be issued until at least fourteen (14) days
have elapsed from the date of expiry of the previous permit.
5.6.7 Where there are two (2) Mobile Signs on a Property, each shall comply with
subsection 5.6.5 or 5.6.6.
5.6.8 A Mobile Sign shall have a maximum of two sign faces and a separate permit shall
be required for each sign face if they relate to different businesses. The applicable
permit fee under Schedule “A” shall be paid for each permit.
5.6.9 An application for a Mobile Sign permit shall be submitted no earlier than twenty-
eight (28) days prior to the intended date the permit comes into effect.
5.6.1 0 Applications for Mobile Sign permits on a Property shall be processed by the City of
Hamilton in the order of receipt, and in the event that applications are submitted
simultaneously and insufficient opportunities exist for the display of a Mobile Sign,
priority for a permit shall be established by means of a draw conducted by the
Designated Official.
5.6.1 1 A Mobile Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed entirely on private Property
and only in the front or exterior side yard of a Property.
5.6.1 2 No Mobile Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed on a Vacant Property.
5.6.1 3 No Mobile Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed except on the Property where
the business or activity being advertised on the Mobile Sign is located.
Sign By-law
Page 19 of 39
5.6.1 4 No Mobile Sign shall exceed a maximum area of 4.5 m2 per sign face for a
commercial or industrial use and 1.8 m2 for an institutional use.
5.6.1 5 No Mobile Sign shall exceed 2.7 metres in Height.
5.6.1 6 No Mobile Sign shall be greater than 2.5 metres in any linear dimension.
5.6.1 7 No more than two (2) Mobile Signs shall be erected, located, or displayed on a
Property at any one time.
5.6.1 8 Where more than one (1) Mobile Sign is erected, located or displayed on the same
Property, they shall be separated by a distance of at least 50.0 metres.
5.6.1 9 No Mobile Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed within:
(a) 10.0 metres of a Ground Sign on the same Property;
(b) 15.0 metres of an intersection or traffic signal or traffic control device;
(c) 3.0 metres of a Driveway Line;
(d) 3.0 metres of side Property Line;
(e) 1.5 metres of a Street Line;
(f) any parking space required under the zoning by-laws of the City of Hamilton; or,
(9) 15.0 metres of a property used solely for residential purposes.
5.6.20 A Mobile Sign shall display the name and telephone number of the Sign Owner in a
clearly visible location.
5.6.21 A Mobile Sign shall display a Validation Marker in a clearly visible location.
5.6.22 No Mobile Sign shall be illuminated or animated, nor shall any Mobile Sign create
noise or motion.
5.6.23 The Copy and message board of the Mobile Sign shall be only black on white or
white on black, provided that:
(a) one line of letters or numbers no more than 30 centimetres in height may be
a single colour other than black or white; and,
(b) graphics or business logos totalling a maximum of 10% of the Sign Area may
be any colour or combination of colours.
5.6.24 Subsection 5.6.23 shall not come into effect until one year after the passage and
enactment of this By-law.
5.6.25 A Mobile Sign shall be permitted in all zones except where the use of the property is
for one or more of the following uses:
(a) A Single Detached Dwelling;
Sign By-law
Page 20 of 39
(b) A Semi Detached Dwelling;
(c) A Duplex;
(d) A Triplex;
(e) A Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(f) A Street townhouse;
(9) A Mobile Home
(h) A Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(i) A Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(j) A Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(k) An Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.6.26 Notwithstanding subsection 5.6.25, no Mobile Sign shall be erected, located, or
displayed on a Property within the Downtown Community Improvement Project
Area, a Business Improvement Area, or within the Ancaster Village Core Area.
5.6.27 Notwithstanding subsections 5.6.1 7 and 5.6.1 8, and subject to the other
requirements for Mobile Signs in this By-law, one Mobile Sign, advertising a grand
opening or closing promotional event, may be erected, located or displayed on a
Property for seven (7) consecutive days, provided that:
(a) the Mobile Sign shall advertise a grand opening or closing promotional event
for any business only once;
(b) where the Mobile Sign advertises a grand opening or closing promotional
event for a business, a Banner shall not also advertise that grand opening or
closing promotional event; and,
(c) there is no Mobile Sign permit otherwise available under this section for the
Property.
5.7 Banners
5.7.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Banner except in accordance with the
applicable regulations under Schedule “B” or Schedule “C”, the applicable general
regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the
By-law.
5.7.2 No Banner shall exceed 6.0 m2 in Sign Area or 1. O metre in Height.
5.7.3 No Banner shall be erected, located, or displayed on a Property for more than
twenty-eight (28) days in one calendar year.
5.7.4 No Banner advertising a special event shall be erected, located, or displayed on
fencing adjacent to a Street unless the special event is organized by a Charity or
Community Organization and the Charity or Community Organization has obtained
the permission of the Owner of the Property on which the fence is located.
1
Sign By-law
Page 21 of 39
5.7.5 Notwithstanding subsection 5.7.3, and subject to the other requirements for
Banners in this By-law, one Banner, advertising a grand opening or closing
promotional event, may be erected, located or displayed on a Property for seven (7)
consecutive days, provided that:
(a) the Banner shall advertise a grand opening or closing promotional event for a
business only once;
(b) where the Banner advertises a grand opening or closing promotional event
for a business, a Mobile Sign shall not also advertise that grand opening or
closing promotional event; and
(c) the Banner is attached only to a wall of the building containing the business
or only to a Ground Sign.
5.8 Sidewalk Signs
5.8.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Sidewalk Sign except in accordance with
the applicable regulations under Schedule “B” or Schedule “C”, the applicable
general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this
section of the By-law.
5.8.2 No Sidewalk Sign shall be more than 0.6 metres in Width or 0.8 metres in Height.
5.8.3 No Sidewalk Sign shall be permanently secured to the ground, any structure or tree.
5.8.4 Where a Sidewalk Sign is erected, located, or displayed on private Property, it shall
be erected, located, or displayed against the front wall of the business it is
advertising.
5.8.5 No Sidewalk Sign shall be erected located, located or displayed on public Property
except on a public sidewalk.
5.8.6 Where a Sidewalk Sign is erected, located, or displayed on a public sidewalk, it
shall be erected, located, or displayed adjacent to the curb opposite or against the
front wall of the business it is advertising provided there is a minimum 1.5 metres of
unobstructed sidewalk and the Sidewalk Sign does not encroach on any Urban
Braille System.
5.8.7 No Person shall erect, display or locate a Sidewalk Sign on a public sidewalk except
during the hours of operation of the business the Sidewalk Sign is advertising.
Sign By-law
Page 22 of 39
5.8.8 No Sidewalk Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed on a public sidewalk
without a permit issued by the City of Hamilton and the permit shall be valid for one
(1) calendar year.
5.8.9 No Sidewalk Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed on a public sidewalk
without displaying a Validation Marker and the Sign Owner shall satisfy the City of
Hamilton’s requirements for liability insurance.
5.9 Inflatable Signs
5.9.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display an Inflatable Sign except in accordance
with the applicable regulations under Schedule “B” or Schedule “C”, the applicable
general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this
section of the By-law.
5.9.2 A permit for an Inflatable Sign shall be valid for seven (7) consecutive days.
5.9.3 No Person or his agent shall apply for or receive permits for an Inflatable Sign which
total more than fourteen (14 ) days for any Property within one (1) calendar year.
5.9.4 No Inflatable Sign shall be more than 7.0 metres in Height or 6.0 metres in Width.
5.9.5 No Inflatable Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed less than 50.0 metres from
a Mobile Sign.
5.9.6 An application for a permit for an Inflatable Sign shall provide information
satisfactory to the Designated Official on how the Inflatable Sign is to be secured to
a fixed base and shall satisfy the City of Hamilton’s requirements for liability
insurance.
5.9.7 Notwithstanding subsections 5.9.4 and 5.9.5, an Inflatable Sign advertising a
holiday or festival may be erected, located or displayed, provided that the Inflatable
Sign:
(a) is no more than 2.7 metres in Height;
(b) is no more than 2.5 metres in Width;
(b) is not located within 3.0 metres of any Property Line; and,
(c) is secured to a fixed base.
5.1 0 New Home Development Ground Signs
5.10.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a New Home Development Ground Sign
except in accordance with the amlicable regulations under Schedule “C”. the
Sign By-law
Page 23 of 39
applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under
this section of the By-law.
5.1 0.2 No New Home Development Ground Sign shall be permitted to be erected, located,
or displayed unless draft plan approval has been granted to the plan of subdivision
it advertises.
5.1 0.3 No New Home Development Ground Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed
within 5.0 metres of any Property Line.
5.10.4 No New Home Development Ground Sign shall erected, located or displayed except
on Vacant Property.
5.1 0.5 No more than two (2) New Home Development Ground Signs may be erected,
located, or displayed in a subdivision and no more than two (2) New Home
Development Ground Signs may be erected, located, or displayed outside the
subdivision on private Property with the approval of the Owner of the Property.
5.1 0.6 No New Home Development Ground Sign shall exceed a maximum Sign Area of
18.0 m2.
5.10.7 In addition to a New Home Development Ground Sign, a maximum of one (1) model
home Sign for each model home may be erected, located, or displayed within a
subdivision provided the model home Sign does not exceed a maximum Sign Area
of 3.0 m2. -
5.10.8 A New Home Development Ground Sign shall be removed twenty-eight (28) days
after the date that the sale of homes in the subdivision has ended.
5.1 I New Home Development Portable Signs
5.1 1. I No Person shall erect, locate, or display a New Home Development Portable Sign
except in accordance with the applicable regulations under Schedule "C", the
applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations under
this section of the By-law.
5.11.2 No New Home Development Portable Sign shall be erected, located, or displayed
on the untravelled portion of a Street except in accordance with the following
regulations:
(a) the Sign Area of the New Home Development Portable Sign shall not exceed
1.2 m2;
Sign By-law
Page 24 of 39
the Height of the New Home Development Portable Sign shall not exceed 1.2
m;
the New Home Development Portable Sign shall not be illuminated or
animated, nor shall it and contain any device that creates noise or motion;
the New Home Development Portable Sign shall be displayed no earlier than
noon on any Friday and removed by no later than noon of the following
Monday, provided that where a statutory holiday falls on a Friday, the New
Home Development Portable Sign shall be displayed no earlier than noon on
the preceding Thursday, and where a statutory holiday falls on a Monday, the
New Home Development Portable Sign shall be removed by no later than noon
on the following Tuesday;
the New Home Development Portable Sign shall not be erected, located or
displayed where it impairs or obstructs the visibility or movement of vehicular or
pedestrian traffic, or where it impairs or obstructs the visibility of warning
devices for railways, traffic signals, traffic control devices or Official Signs or
Authorized Signs;
the New Home Development Portable Sign shall not be erected, located, or
displayed on a traffic island or median or attached to a light standard or utility
pole;
the New Home Development Portable Sign shall display a Validation Marker;
the Sign Owner shall satisfy the liability insurance requirements of the City of
Hamilton;
no more than ten (10) permits shall be issued for New Home Development
Portable Signs advertising the sale of homes in the subdivision;
the maximum number of New Home Development Portable Signs permitted at
each intersection shall be three (3) Signs on any one corner of an intersection
and each builder shall use no more than one (1) Sign on each intersection;
no New Home Development Portable Sign shall be erected, located, or
displayed less than 1.5 metres from the curb or edge of the travelled portion of
the roadway where there is no curb;
no New Home Development Portable Sign shall be erected, located, or
displayed on a public sidewalk; and,
. -
(m) no New Home Development Portable Sign shall be erected, located, or
displayed less than 3.0 metres from a Driveway Line.
5.1 2 Poster
5.12.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Poster except in accordance with
Schedule “B” and the general regulations applicable under this By-law.
Sign By-law
Page 25 of 39
5.12.2 Notwithstanding Schedule “B” and any general regulations applicable under this By-
law, the City of Hamilton may remove and dispose of Posters without notice or
compensation to any person.
5.13 Election Signs
5.13.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display an Election Sign except in accordance with
the applicable regulations under Schedule “B”, the applicable general regulations
under this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the By-law.
5.13.2 The maximum size of an Election Sign is 1.5 m2 for each sign face.
5.13.3 No Person or his agent shall erect, locate, or display an Election Sign unless it is
erected, located, or displayed on private Property, except as a Poster subject to all
of the regulations regarding Posters in this By-law and to subsections 5.13.4,
5.13.5, and 5.13.7.
5.1 3.4 No Election Sign associated with a federal or provincial election shall be erected,
located, or displayed earlier than the date the writ of election is issued, with the
exception of signage at a Campaign Office.
5.13.5 No Election Sign associated with a municipal election shall be erected, located, or
displayed earlier than twenty-eight (28) days prior to voting day, with the exception
of signage at a Campaign Office.
5.1 3.6 Any Sign used by a candidate during an election that is larger than an Election Sign
shall comply with the regulations of this By-law with respect to permits, structure,
location, dimensions, and characteristics.
5.13.7 All Election Signs shall be removed no later than three (3) days after the voting day
of the election for which the Sign was erected, located, or displayed. For the
purpose of this subsection, the candidate shall be responsible for the removal of the
Election Signs.
5.14 Billb oards
5.14.1 No Person shall erect, locate, or display a Billboard except in accordance with the
applicable regulations under Schedule “C”, the applicable general regulations under
this By-law, and the specific regulations under this section of the By-law.
Sign By-law
Page 26 of 39
5.14.2 No Billboard shall be erected, located, or displayed except in accordance with the
following regulations:
(a) the Billboard shall not be erected, located, or displayed within 400.0 metres of
the right of way of Highway 403, the Queen Elizabeth Way, the Lincoln M.
Alexander Parkway, or the Red Hill Creek Expressway;
(b) the Billboard shall not be erected, located, or displayed on a Property within the
Downtown Community Improvement Project Area;
(c) the Billboard shall not be erected, located, or displayed less than 300.0 metres
from another Billboard;
(d) the Billboard shall not be erected, located, or displayed less than 300.0 metres
from any residentially Zoned Property;
(e) the Billboard shall not be animated;
(f) the Sign Area of a Billboard shall not exceed 18.0 m2;
(9) the Height of a Billboard shall not exceed 12.0 metres;
(h) the Width of a Billboard shall not exceed 4.0 metres: and,
(i) the Billboard shall be erected, located, or displayed on Vacant, undeveloped
Property Zoned commercial or industrial.
5.14.3 Where a Property on which a Billboard is erected, located, or displayed ceases to
be Vacant or undeveloped, the Sign Owner shall remove the Billboard from the
Property.
PART 6.0
VARIANCES
6.1 Any Person may apply for a variance from this By-law or any provision thereof.
6.2 An application for variance shall be made on the form prescribed by the City of
Hamilton and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee, as set out in Schedule
“A”.
6.3 Variances may be authorized by the Director of Development and Real Estate or his
designate.
6.4 The City of Hamilton may authorize a variance if in its opinion the general intent and
purpose of the By-law are maintained.
6.5 In considering an application for a variance, the City of Hamilton shall have regard
for:
(a) special circumstances or conditions applying to the land, building or use
referred to in the application;
Sign By-law
Page 27 of 39
whether strict application of the provisions of this By-law in the context of the
special circumstances applying to the land, building or use, would result in
practical difficulties or unnecessary and unusual hardship for the applicant,
inconsistent with the general intent and purpose of this By-law;
whether such special circumstances or conditions are pre-existing and not
created by the Sign Owner or applicant; and
whether the Sign that is the subject of the variance will alter the essential
character of the area in which the Sign will be located.
6.6 applicant may appeal the variance application decision of the Director of
Develo-pment and Real Estate to the Planning and Economic Development
Committee.
6.7 The City Clerk shall notify the applicant once a hearing date before the Planning
and Economic Development Committee has been fixed and if the applicant does not
attend at the appointed time and place, the Committee may proceed in the absence
of the applicant and the applicant shall not be entitled to further notice in the
proceeding.
6.8 Council may uphold or vary the recommendations of the Planning and Economic
Development Committee or do any act or make any decision that it might have done
had it conducted the hearing itself and the applicant shall not be entitled to a further
hearing on the matter before Council and the decision of Council shall be final.
PART 7.0
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
7.1 Every Person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is guilty of an offence.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Provincial Offences Act, upon conviction a Person
is liable to a fine of not more than $5,000.00 exclusive of costs.
7.2 Where a Person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction
has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition
to any other remedy or penalty provided for by law, make an order prohibiting the
continuation or repetition of the offence by the Person convicted.
7.3 Where a Sign is erected, located, or displayed on, over, partly on, or partly over,
Property owned by or under the jurisdiction of the City of Hamilton and not in
accordance with the regulations of this By-law, the Sign may be removed
immediately by the City of Hamilton without notice or compensation.
7.4 Where a Sign is erected, located, or displayed in contravention of this By-law, the
Designated Official may immediately pull down or remove any Sign that he
Sign By-law
Page 28 of 39
determines constitutes a safety hazard or a concern without notice or
com pensati on.
7.5 Where a Sign does not comply with this By-law or a permit issued under this By-
law, the Designated Official may order the Sign Owner to remove or bring the Sign
into compliance in the manner and within the time specified in the order.
7.6 The order mentioned in section 7.5 may be served:
(a) by personal service upon the Sign Owner;
(b) by prepaid registered mail sent to the last address of the Sign Owner, shown on
the records of the City of Hamilton; or,
(c) by prominently posting a copy of the order either on the Sign in respect of which
the order is made, or on the Property upon which the Sign is erected, located,
or displayed.
7.7 Where the order is served in accordance with section 7.6 it is deemed to have been
received by the party being served upon the mailing or posting of the order.
7.8 Where a Sign is not removed or is not brought into conformity as required by an
order under section 7.5, the Designated Official may have the Sign removed without
notice or compensation. For this purpose, the Designated Official, an inspector and
their contractor or other agent may enter upon the Property at any reasonable time.
7.9 The cost incurred by the City of Hamilton in removing a Sign under this part of the
By-law is deemed to be municipal taxes and may be added to the collector‘s roll and
collected in the same manner as municipal taxes. Despite the foregoing, the cost
incurred by the City of Hamilton in removing a Sign under this part of the By-law is a
debt payable to the City of Hamilton and may be recovered in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
7.10 Any Sign removed by the City of Hamilton shall be stored by the City of Hamilton for
twenty-eight (28) days, during which time the Sign Owner may redeem such Sign
upon payment of the applicable fee prescribed on Schedule “A.”
7.1 1 Where a Sign has been removed by the City of Hamilton and has been stored for a
period of twenty-eight (28) days and has not been redeemed by the Sign Owner,
such Sign may be destroyed or otherwise disposed of by the City of Hamilton
without notice or compensation.
Sign By-law
Page 29 of 39
PART 8.0
CONFLICT
8.1 Where a provision of this By-law conflicts with a provision of any other by-law or any
federal or provincial statute or regulation, the provision that establishes the h.igher
standard to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public shall prevail.
PART 9.0
VALIDITY
9.1 If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any subsection, section or part of this
By-law invalid, it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall
continue to be in force.
PART 10.0
REPEAL
10.1 The By-laws listed on Schedule “D” are hereby repealed as of the day on which this
By-law comes into force and effect.
PART 11 .O
EFFECTIVE DATE
11.1 This By-law comes into force and effect on February 1, 2007.
Sign By-law
Page 30 of 39
~
SCHEDULE “A’T O BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Fees
1. PERMITS FOR SIGNS
SIGN TYPE FEE
Ground Sign $150.00 sign area of less than or equal to 2.5 m2
New Home Development Ground
Sign $250.00 sign area from greater than 2.5 m2t o equal to
4.0 m2
$500.00 sign area of greater than 4.0 m2
Awning, Canopy, Marquee, $250.00
Parapet, Projecting and Wall
Signs
Billboard $500.00
Mobile Sign $1 00.00 for 28 consecutive days
$65.00 for 14 consecutive days
Mobile Sign advertising a grand $15 0 for 7 consecutive days
opening or closing promotional
event
Sidewalk Sign $75.00 per year
Banner $75.00 for 28 consecutive days
Banner advertising a grand $1 50 for 7 consecutive days
opening or closing promotional
event
~
Inflatable Sign $75 for 7 consecutive days
New Home Development Portable $50.00 per year
Sign
2. SIGN VARIANCE APPLICATION
I I
Fee $670.00
Sign By-law
Page 31 of 39
SCHEDULE “A” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Fees
Fee for a Sign Erected, Located $970.00
or Displayed Without a Permit
3. ENFORCEMENT FEES
Removal of an Unlawful $200.00 per Sign or the actual cost of removing the
Permanent Sign Sign, whichever is greater
Storage Charge for an Unlawful $50.00 per Sign per day
Permanent Sign
Removal of an Unlawful Mobile $200.00 per Sign or the actual cost of removing the
Sign Sign, whichever is greater
Storage Charge for an Unlawful $50.00 per Sign per day
Mobile Sign
Removal of an Unlawful Portable $50.00 per Sign or the actual cost of removing the Sign,
Sign whichever is greater
Storage Charge for an Unlawful $25.00 per Sign per day
Portable Sign
Storage Charge for an Unlawful $25.00 per Sign per day
Election Sign
I
4. REFUND of FEES
Notwithstanding the percentages below, no refund is to be made of an amount less than
$75.00
~
75 percent if, in the opinion of the Designated Official, administrative functions only have
been performed
50 percent if, in the opinion of the Designated Official, administrative and plan examination
functions only have been performed
25 percent if the permit has been issued and no inspections have been performed
subsequent to permit issuance and the Sign has not been erected, located or displayed
Sign By-law
Page 32 of 39
SCHEDULE “B” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Signs Not Requiring Permits
No permit shall be required for Signs meeting the following regulations:
1
SIGNTYPE LOCATION/ZONE REGULATIONS
Sign in a City of Hamilton City of Hamilton park or Subject to the provision of tt
park or cemetery cemetery City of Hamilton By-law
governing the park or
cemetery.
Inflatable Sign advertising a Private Property Refer to Subsection 5.9.7
holiday or festival
Election Sign Private Property Refer to Section 5.13
Commemorative Sign, Public and Private Property Attached to the wall of the
plaques, or corner stone of a building.
non-advertising nature
Emblem of Religious Private Property
Organization
Flag of a country, province, Public and Private Property
territory, municipality,
corporation, organization or
association
I
Sidewalk Sign Private Property Refer to Section 5.8
Residential Zone Maximum Sign Area 0.3 m2.
Signs must be attached to a
flat against the wall of the
related building.
Signs must be non-illuminati
Bed and Breakfast Sign Residenti aI Zone Maximum Sign Area 0.3 m2.
No Trespass or Warning Private Property Maximum Sign Area 0.2 m2.
Sign
Sign advertising the sale of Agricultural Zone Maximum Sign Area 3.0 m2
seasonal farm produce Approval of the Owner of tht
Property.
Sign By-law
Page 33 of 39
SCHEDULE “B” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Signs Not Requiring Permits
No permit shall be required for Signs meeting the following regulations:
Sign associated with an Ag ricuI t u ral Zone Maximum Sign Area 3.0 m2.
agricultural use
Sign erected, located or Agricultural Zone Maximum Sign Area 9.0 m2
displayed by a non-profit Approval of the Owner of the
agricultural society for an Property.
event or fair it operates
Mural Commercial Zone Maximum Sign Area 50% of
the wall on which the mural is
displayed.
Incidental Sign Private Property Maximum Sign Area 1. O m2.
Directional Sign Private Property
Banner erected, located or Private Property Refer to Section 5.7.
displayed by a Charity or
com m uni ty organization
Sign erected, located or Private Property in Maximum Sign Area not
displayed by a Person Residential Zones if the exceeding 1.2 m2 and Height
performing work or services service is being performed not exceeding 1.25 metres.
on a residential Property at that Property No illumination.
Display only during the period
the work or service is being
performed.
Real Estate Sign Private Property/Residential Maximum Sign Area 1.0 m2
Use Only erected, located, or
displayed on Property for sale
or rent.
Display no longer than seven
(7) days after a firm sale is
reported to the local realtors
association or seven (7) days
after the Property or space has
been leased.
Sign By-law
Page 34 of 39
~~ ___
SCHEDULE “B” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Signs Not Requiring Permits
No permit shall be required for Signs meeting the following regulations:
Real Estate Sign Private Property/Apartment Maximum Sign Area 4.0 m2
Only erected, located, or
displayed on Property for sale
or rent.
Display no longer than seven
(7) days after a firm sale is
reported to the local realtors
association or seven (7) days
after the Property or space has
been leased.
Real Estate Sign Private Property Maximum Sign Area 4.0 m2
Commercial/lndustriaI Use Only erected, located, or
displayed on Property for sale
or rent.
Open House Directional Maximum Sign Area 0.5 m2
Sign Not erected, located, or
displayed on a traffic median,
traffic island, light standard or
utility pole.
Located no closer than 0.3
metres from the sidewalk.
Displayed between 1O:OO a.m.
and 6:OO p.m. the day of the
open house.
Construction Information Private Property Maximum Sign Area 10.0 m2.
Sign Display no longer than 30 days
after project’s completion.
Temporary Personal Sign Private Property Maximum Sign Area 2.0 m2.
Located 3.0 metres from the
Street Line and 3.0 metres
from any interior Property Line.
Maximum display period of 48
hours.
Sign By-law
Page 35 of 39
SCHEDULE “B” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Signs Not Requiring Permits
No permit shall be required for Signs meeting the following regulations:
Poster Community Bulletin Boards - Paper or cardboard only.
or Poster Sleeve at - Maximum Sign Area 22.0 cm
Designated Locations by 28.0 cm.
- Only affixed by tape.
- Maximum one Poster per
approved location.
I
- Maximum display period of 21
days and not more than 3 days
after the end of an advertised
event.
Window Sign Private Property Maximum 50% of the window
surface.
Sign By-law
Page 36 of 39
SCHEDULE “C” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Sign Provisions For Signs Requiring Permits
A permit shall be required for the following Signs:
Sign Type ZonelUse Regulations
Maximum Maximum Sign Maximum
Number Area Height
Ground Sign Refer to Separation of 0.3 times the 3.5 metres
Subsection 200.0 metres Property Frontage (Sign Area
5.2.1 1 between each on which the Sign less than 4.0
Ground Sign is erected, m2)
parallel with the located, or
6.0 metres
Frontage on a displayed to a
(Sign Area
Street maximum area of
4.0 m2 to 6.0
18.0 m2f or each
Sign Face m2)
~
7.5 metres
(Sign Area
over 6.0 m2)
Wall Sign Refer to 15% of the
Subsection building elevation
5.3.12 on which the Sign
is erected,
located, or
displayed
Awning, Canopy and Refer to Graphic or
Marquee Signs Subsection lettering limited to
5.5.3 20% of the
surface
Inflatable Sign not Commercial Refer to Section 5.9
including an Inflatable and Industrial
Sign advertising a Zones on
holiday or festival developed and
occupied
Property
Sign By-law
Page 37 of 39
SCHEDULE “C” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
Sign Provisions For Signs Requiring Permits
A permit shall be required for the following Signs:
Parapet Sign Refer to 1 for each side of
Subsection a building parapet
5.3.12
! -
Projecting Sign Commercial 1 1.0 m2
Zones
Billboard Commercial Refer to Section 5.1 4
and Industrial
Zones on
Vacant,
undeveloped
Property
Mobile Sign Refer to Refer to Section 5.6
Subsections
5.6.25 and
5.6.26
~ ~
Banner not including a Commercial, Refer to Section 5.7
Banner erected, Industrial and
located or displayed Institutional
by a Charity or Zones
community
organization
Sidewalk Sign not Commercial Refer to Section 5.8
including a Sidewalk use
Sign on private
Property
New Home Residential and Refer to Section 5.1 0
Development Ground Commercial
Sign Zones
New Home Residential and Refer to Section 5.1 1
Development Portable Commercial
Sign Zones
Sign By-law
Page 38 of 39
SCHEDULE “D” TO BY-LAW NO. 06-243
By-law Laws Repealed by By-law 06-243
The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster
95-50
95-51
The Corporation of the Town of Flamborough
97-674
The Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook
51 1-94
5 12 -94
512-1-95
The Corporation of the City of Hamilton
Subsections 5(3a), 5(3b) and 5(3c) of 66-100
Section 1 of By-law 75-127
81-160
81-218
Section 16a. of 86-77
93-003
93-121
94-056
96-092
97-026
97-075
City of Hamilton
02-368
05-15 4
The Corporation of the Down of Dundas
3094-79
314 0-79 amends 3094-79
3213 -80 amends 3094-79
3238-81 amends 3094-79
3304-81 amends 3094-79
3386-83 amends 3094-79
3422-83 amends 3094-79
3559-85
3732-88 amends 3094-79
4286-96 amends 3094-79
4333-97 amends 3094-79
4384-97 amends 3094-79
441 0-98 amends 3094-79
4532-00 amends 3094-79
Sign By-law
Page 39 of 39
4579-00 amends 3094-79
The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek
2531- 88
2627-88
2792-89 amends 2627-88
2867-89 amends 267-88 and 2792-89
3042-89
314 1 -90
3263-90 amends 3042-89
3515 -92 amends 3042-89
3721- 93 amends 3042-89
3961- 94 amends 3042-89
4267-95
4529-97 amends 3042-89
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth
R94-117
R97-030
R99-002 amends R94-117



Content from 06344 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 06-023 (FCS060114/PWO6137)
CM: December 13, 2006
Bill No. 344
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-344
To Amend the Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2007
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of December, 2006 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 06-023 and did
authorize the 2007 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the fees
and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2007 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “A” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2
2. That Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is hereby repealed
and that Schedule “B” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
3. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2007.
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged for 2007.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 13th day of December, 2006.
1
H-
MA OR
3
SCHEDULE “A”
Sanitaw Surcharge
The Sanitary Surcharge is calculated as 100% of the gross amount of the
monthly or bi-monthly metered water or non-metered water rate.
4
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $1 06.70 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $31 9.91 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $426.60 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1 : A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: Eo/o = /A - D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
5
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
G = Actual Volume (m3) of Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water; for 2006 is $0.851 per cubic meter of water;
and for 2007 is $0.913 per cubic meter of water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: G x F% = H
Step 6: HxI=$J



Content from 06345 to amend the sewer use bylaw 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 06-023
(FCS060114/PWO6137)
CM: December 13,2006
Bill No. 345
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-345
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law 04-150, as amended,
and Implement the 2007 Sewer Use Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law 04-150, known and referred to as the “Sewer Use By-law”, which
By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 13h day of December, 2006, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 06-023 and did
authorize the 2007 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the sewer
use fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2007 sewer use fees and charges set out herein
has been given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council
considers adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said
Municipal Act, 200 I.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “D” to By-law No. 04-150, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “D” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2007.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 04-150, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 13th day of December, 2006.
/-
MAYOR
*GST to be added to fees
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
S
EFFECTIVE JANUARY lS2T007,
(REFERRED TO IN SECTIONS 4,7 AND 8)
1. Annual permit to discharge hauled sewage $252.64*
2. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
discharge: discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewaae Vehicle comdiant compliant
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 m' or
gallons or any part any part thereof $ 38.02* $38.02*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 38.02* $76.04"
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 76.04* $1 14.06*
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $1 14.06* $19 0.09*
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $1 52.08" $228.1 1*
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10000 imperial m3
aallons
*GST to be added to fees
(b) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated outside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for all discharges
from outside the City:
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant and non-
compliant
Up to 1000 imperial up to 4.54 m'or any part
gallons or any part thereof $76.04*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 15.9 $1 52.08*
less than or equal to m3
3500 imperial aallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9 m' but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 22.7 $228.1 1*
less than or equal to m3
5000 imperial gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 36.3 $380.19"
less than or equal to m3
8000 imperial gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to $456.32*
less than or equal to 45.43 m3
10000 imperial gallons
c) Holding Tanks of Recreational Vehicles $ 5.00*
3. Overstrength Discharge Fees
PPaarraammeetteerr FFeeee ((cceennttss//kkgg))
BB..OO..DD.. $$00..66006655""
SSuussppeennddeedd SSoolliiddss $$00..44885522**
PPhheennoolliicc CCoommppoouunnddss $$00..66006655**
SSoollvveenntt EExxttrraaccttaabbllee MMaatttteerr $$00..55009944**
KKijeellcdlanhhll NNiittrrnongoenn Q$I1 .8Q4A6Rq8** 1
1
PPhhoosspplh IVo Ir Uu Ss 3$-11.. 2LY9Y9;2L**
*GST to be added to fees
5
4. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $249.15*
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $249.1 5*
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $249.1 5*
5. Spills Response Fee (per hour) $ 53.87*
6. Information Requests $1 14.62*
*GST to be added to fees



Content from 06346 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 06-023
CM: December 13,2006
Bill No. 346
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-346
To Amend the Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended,
And Implement the 2007 Water Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by-
law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control:
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of December, 2006, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 06-023 and did
authorize the 2007 water and wastewater fees and charges, including but not
limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2007 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001.
2
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “A” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “A” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
4. That Schedule “C” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “C” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
5. That Schedule “E” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “E”a ttached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
6. That Schedule “G” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, be repealed and
that Schedule “G” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
7. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of the 1’‘ day of
January, 2007.
8. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended,
including but not limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 13th day of December, 2006.
3
SCHEDULE “A’
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2007
Water: City of Hamilton
$333.14 per annum
Note: Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Rate is 100% of non-metered
water rate for a combined total rate of $666.27 per annum.
4
SCHEDULE "C"
MISCELLANEOUS RATES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2006
(Referred to in Section 12(6), (7) and (8))
1. Travelling Shows and Other Temporary Occasions
The deposit required from travelling shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Thousand, Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($5,250.00), and
consists of:
(a) Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($250.00) as a usage deposit (to be
applied to the cost of temporary connection/disconnection, the per
diem rental cost for the hydrant adapter and the amount due for water
used); and
(b) Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) as a damage deposit (refundable
upon return to the City of the hydrant adapter, less any damages
incurred) .
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 12 of Schedule "E" to this By-
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
2. Public Water Filling Stations
(a) The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water
Filling Stations be $1.370 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public
Water Filling Stations are located at:
(i) Cormorant Road, Ancaster
(ii) Dartnall Road, Hamilton.
(b) Water Haulage License Fee $17 0.00
3. Private Water Filling Stations
The one time permit fee for new private water filling stations approved by the
General Manager of Public Works is $1,000.00 and is payable upon permit
application.
5
The annual permit fee for both existing private water filling stations and new
private water filling stations approved by the General Manager of Public
Works is $300.00 and is payable within one month of the notification by the
City.
4. Areas Outside the City of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G" to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
6
SCHEDULE "El'
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2007
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $72.00
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in Section 4(l)(b) of By-law R84-026,
as amended:
7
2. Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 33% Overhead
3. For superintending the laying of a new water service
(a) Regular Inspection - Regular Hours $62.00
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $62.00
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
(c) Regular Inspection - After Hours $93.00
4. Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee:**
(a) Service replacement of public portion from Omm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $265.00
(b) Inspection of private portion of service replacement from
Omm to and including 20mm $200.00
5. For turning water off $62.00
6. For turning water on $62.00
7. For turning water on & off during the same call $93.00
8. For each Special Water Service to be connected as
referred to in Section 4(18) of this By-law $2,845 .OO
9. Discharge of Special Water Service Agreements $335.00
10. Processing of Special Water Service Agreements $505.00
11. Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes $90.00
12. For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):***
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnectionf ee
(a) Connection/DisconnectionF ee - Regular Hours $1 75.Wvisit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee - After Hours $265.00/visit
(c) Additional per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental $1 O.OO/day
8
13. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter:
11 I I
Size of Meter cost****
11 I I
16 mm diameter $ 114.21
11 I 1
20 mm diameter $ 168.77
11 I I
25 mm diameter $ 209.30
38 mm diameter $ 466.84
50 mm diameter $ 623.07
11 1 I
100 mm diameter (turbine) $ 1,935.09
I I
100 mm diameter
(cornp oun d ) $3,498-60
$9,144.30
150 mm diameter $ 7,255.70
150 mm diameter (fire $1 1,765.09
service compound)
11 I I
200 mm diameter (turbine) $ 5,263.33
200 mm diameter (fire $16,177.02
>250 mm diameter (all cost + 33%
overhead
14. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $ 95.00
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $14 5.00
100 mm plus diameter $330.00
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) cost +33%
overhead
9
15. For service calls other than previously specified:
(a) Service Call - Regular Hours $62.00
(b) Service Call - After Hours $95.00
16. Meter Open By-pass $330.00
17. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
18. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge cost plus 33%
overhead
19. Rental Rate for Landscaping Lease (Per Annum) Case Dependent
No set fee
20. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - No Field Inspection $90 .oo
21. Status of Special Water Service Agreements - Field Inspection $240.00
22. General Administration Fees
Replacement of lost cards for water filling stations $40.00
Account Review $88.00
General Request (per hour) $45 .OO
Notes to Schedule “E”:
*
A service charge applies for each refund issued.
**
Additional fees will apply for service size upgrades based on size and length
***
This service requires a $5,250.00 deposit ($250.00 usage deposit and
$5,000.00 damage deposit)
****
Plus PST and GST
“Regular Hours” means 7 a.m. - 3 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday
“After Hours” means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday, Sunday,
public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized or required by
law to be closed.
10
SCHEDULE "G"
TABLE OF METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2007
(Referred to in Section 12(2), (3) & (4) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Charqe
Minimum
Residential Approved Volume/ Approved Minimum
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Rate Bi-Monthly Monthly Rate VolumelMonth
15 mm to 20
mm $13.10 10 m3 $6.55 5 m3
16 mm $1 3.1 0 10 m3 $6.55 5 m3
20 mm $13.10 10 m3 $6.55 5 m3
25 mm $69.26 30 m3 $34.63 15 m3
38 mm $76.94 30 m3 $38.47 15 m3
50 mm $91.50 30 m3 $45.75 15 m3
75 mm $1 58.52 30 m3 $79.26 15 m3
100 mm $203.04 30 m3 $1 01.52 15 m3
150 mm $359.28 30 m3 $1 79.64 15 m3
200 mm $620.36 30 m3 $310.18 15 m3
250 mm $955.04 30 m3 $477.52 15 m3
100 mm $304.56 30 m3 $15 2.28 15 m3
150 mm $538.94 30 m3 $269.47 15 m3
200 mm $930.52 30 m3 $465.26 15 m3
11
9) Consumption Rate
The consumption charge for the amount of water used over and above the
specified volume included in the bi-Monthly Minimum Charge is as follows:
Specified Volume
Included in Billed
Minimum Charge Usage Charge Per Cubic Metre
pesi d e nt ia I 10 m3 $0.913 > 10 m3
10 m3
.Small Commercial $0.913 > 10 m3
.Commercial I industrial 30 m3 $0.913 > 30 m3
Haldimand & Water Haulers 30 m3 $1.370 > 30 m3
C) SANITARY SEWER SURCHARGE RATE IS 100% OF WATER
CONSUMPTION (applies to all metered residential, commercial, industrial
and institutional water consumption).



Content from 06348 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026 and implement the 2007 fees and chargespdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 06-023 (FCS0601141PW06137)
CM: December 13,2006
Bill No. 348
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 06-348
To Amend The Sewer and Drain Bylaw No. 06-026
and Implement the 2007 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on February 15, 2006, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 06-026, which by-law came into force and effect on
March 1, 2006 and may be known and referred to as “The Sewer and Drain By-
law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, a municipality may pass by-laws imposing fees or charges on
any class of persons for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of
the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including property
under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of December, 2006, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 06-023 and did
authorize the 2007 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the fees
and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2007 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate and otherwise in accordance with the provisions of the said Municipal
Act, 2001.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Schedule “A” to By-law No. 06-026 is hereby repealed and that
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law be substituted therefor.
2
2. That this by-law shall come into force and take effect as of January 1,
2007.
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 06-026, including but not
limited to all other fees and charges therein, are hereby confirmed as
unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 13th day of December, 2006.
3
SCHEDULE "A"
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
1. Basic Fee for any sewer permit $53.30
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1) of this Schedule "A,th e following
fees are payable:
(a) for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public portion, or for
either one individually $22.40
(b) for a Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $22.40
(c) for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $22.40
(d) for a Catchbasin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $22.40
(e) inspect Storm Sewer $22.40
(f) inspect Sanitary Sewer $22.40
2. Processing of Special Service Agreements $421.20
3. Special Service Agreements (sanitary or storm) $1,850.00
(sub-section 4(1) of the By-law)
4. Special Service Agreements (sanitary and storm) $2,440 .OO
(sub-section 4(1) of the By-law)
5. Discharge of Special Service Agreements $224.00
6. Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $224.00
4
7. Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $33.50
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
8. Service Charge for Missed Appointments $10 0.00
and Inspections Not Ready and
completed follow-up inspection ($50.00/visit).
9. Rental Rate for Landscaping Lease (Per Annum) Case Dependent
No Set Fee
10. Status of Special Service Agreements - No Field Inspection $75.40
11. Status of Special Service Agreements - Field Inspection $207.00
12. (a) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Regular Hours $345.80 plus GST
(b) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - After Hours $460.51 plus GST
(c) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate $412.30 plus GST
(d) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $568.58 plus GST
(e) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $694.93 plus GST
(f) Abandoned Sewer Lateral lnvestigation- Regular Hours $515 .38 plus GST
(9) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $641.73 plus GST
Notes to Schedule “A’:
1. Unless stated otherwise, all fees and charges are GST exempt.
2. “Regular Hours” means 7 a.m. - 5 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
3. “After Hours” means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday,
Sunday, public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized
or required by law to be closed.
4. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning” means services to relieve blockage(s) in the
Sewer Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer service.
5. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate” means services to locate any
Defects in the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television inspection.
6. “Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services to complete a
thorough cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer Lateral.
7. “Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services related to an
unsuccessful attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.



Content from 07025 to amend fireworks bylaw no 02285pdf:
Authority: Item 4, Emergency & Community
Services Com mittee
Report: 07-00 1
CM: January 24,2007
Bill No. 025
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-025
To Amend Fireworks Bylaw No. 02-285 to Provide for the Sale of Family
Fireworks for a Period of 14 Days, Prior to Holidays
WHEREAS Council enacted By-law 05-339 providing for a temporary sale period of
fourteen (14) days, with said By-law being repealed on July 2, 2006;
AND WHEREAS Council requested an update regarding the merit of amending By-law
02-285 to provide for the sale of family fireworks on a permanent basis for a fourteen
(14) day period, prior to holidays, in place of the current seven (7) day sale period;
AND WHEREAS Section 121 of the Municipal Act, S. 0. 2001, c. 25 provides that a
municipality may regulate or prohibit the sale of fireworks;
AND WHEREAS a phrasing change is required to accurately reflect the proper and
current title of the position of “Fire Chief’ as defined in By-law 02-285;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Section 5.3 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 02-285 is hereby amended to
replace the word “seven” with the word “fourteen”.
2. That Sub-section l.l(g) of City of Hamilton By-law No. 02-285 is hereby
amended to read “’Fire Chief‘ means the City’s General Manager of Hamilton
Emergency Services;”.
To Amend Fireworks By-law No. 02-285 to Provide for the Sale of
Family Fireworks for a Period of 14 Days, Prior to Holidays
Page 2
3. That this by-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing.
PASSED and ENACTED this 24thd ay of January, 2007.



Content from 07043 omb file no pl070386  to amend zoning bylaw 05200pdf:
ISSUE DATE:
• January 18, 2008 PL070386
Ontario
By-law No. 07-043 Ontario Municipal Board
Commission des affaires municipales de I'Ontario
IN THE MATTER OF subsection 17(24)ofthe Plannÿg Acÿ R.S.O. 1990, c. P. 13, as
amended
• Appellant: Hamilton Metal Trading Corp.. and Aberdeen (Hamilton)
Holdings Inc. and Trinity Property Investments Inc.
Subject: Proposed Official Plan Amendment No. 210
Municipality: City of Hamilton
PL070386
• OMB Case No.:
OMB File No.: 0070052
IN THE MATTER OF subsection 34(1.9) of the Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P. 13, as
amended
Appellant: Hamilton Metal Trading Corp. and Aberdeen (Hamilton)
Holdings Inc. and Trinity Property Investments Inc.
Subject: Zoning By-law No. 07-043
Municipality: City of Hamilton
PL070386
OMB Case No.:
OMB File No.: R0070071
AP PEARA.NCES:
Parties Counsel
Hamilton Metal Trading Corp. and Aberdeen Joel Farber
(Hamilton) Holdings Inc. and Trinity Property
Investments Inc.
The Gore District Land Trust Corporation Eric Nanayakkar
(McMaster Innovation park)
City of Hamilton Nancy Smith
MEMORANDUM OF ORAL DECISION DELIVERED BY R. RQSSI ON 15
JANUARY 2008 AND ORDER OF.THE BOARD
This is the fifth Pre-hearing conference related• to these appeals. At the
December 2007 Pre-hearing conference, the Municipality reached a settlement with the
Gore District Land Trust Corporation (known as the McMaster Innovation Park).
4..
- 2 - PL070386
Specifically, the West Hamilton Innovation District is the entire piece of land that the City
has envisioned as a research and development park. A portion of these lands
Comprises the McMaster Innovation Park and•this is the portion of land thatwas dealt
with in the December Pre-headng conference settlement. At that time and on consent,
the Board approved both Official Plan Amendment 210, as amended, and the Zoning
• By-law Amendment 07-043 as it related to the City and Gore. At that Pre-hearing
conference, Mr. Farber, on behalf of the "Trinity" group, expressed no objection to the
settlement that the City and Gore had reached. "
Mr. Farber advised the Board at today's fifth Pre-hearing• conference that the
owners of Aberdeen (Hamilton) Holdings Inc. and Hamilton Metal Trading Corp. wrote
to Mr. Farber to dispute details of Mr. Farber's retainer. Mr. Farber provided the Board
with their••letter, his letter of response to the princiPals and a related Agreement of
Purchase and Sale binding Trinity Properties Investments Inc. and Hamilton Metal
Trading Corp. and Aberdeen (Hamilton) Holdings Inc. The Board received those
.documents and it placed the items on the file but they are not exhibits to these
Proceedings.
The Board metprivately with the Parties tO consider'the matter of the disputed
retainer and to determine the impact of that matter on these proceedings. After fruitful
discussions, the Board determines that at the time of the DeCember 2007 p re-hearing
and thepresentation of settlement details, all Parties were in agreement regarding the
resolution of the Gore (McMaster) appeal. At that t meÿ the principals in Aberdeen and
Hamilton Metal had not expressed a concern with Mr. Farber's retainer. •The Board
determines that his clients' concern and resolution of the retairÿer issue are matters
clearly beyond the purview of the Board's jurisdiction and do.not affect the agreement
reached in December 2007.
The Board also agrees with Ms Smith that the city mustknow with whom it is
dealing and the Board is satisfied that the components of the 'q'rinity" group and its
representing Counsel, Mr. Farber, were known to all Patties in•December 2007 and that
no objection to the resulting McMaster settlementwas•raisedl The Board will provide
the "Trinity" group with a period of up to four weeks to meet with Mr. Farber to discuss
how they intend to proceed with the balance of the• pre-hearing and hearing processes
so that the City, and by extension, interested• participants and the general public might
-3- PL070386
know who will represent Hamilton Metal Trading Corp. and Aberdeen (Hamilton)
Holdings Inc. in respect of the balance of the appeals and these entities' re!ationship
with Trinity Property Investments Inc. The Board also directs Mr; Faiber io advise the
Board on the precise nature of Trinity• Property Investments Inc.'s status in these and
subsequent proceedings. Mr. Farber will provide the Board with as much information as
possible in this regard and furnish all relevant supporting documentation. .
Mr. Farber provided some contextual information regarding the Parties. he has
represented during the Pre-hearing conferences. He advised the Board that the
implementing planning instruments for the subject lands were approved in .February
2007. The impact of that approval on the Hamilton Metal Trading Corp. and Aberdeen
(Hamilton) Holdings Inc. renders the existing uses as legal nonconforming. Mr. Farber
submitted that the approval hampered the development potential Of those lands by
.... removing existing uses that would have been allowed in the •broader underlying K•
zoning that currently exists. The aforementioned two Parties have appealed those
planning instruments to the board in their entirety. .
In November 2007, Trinity Property Investments Inc. entered into an •agreement
of purchase and sale (on file) with these two vendors, at which time it assumed carr!age
of the appeals. The Parties' intention was to pursue a mixed-use proposal including an
office component and a retail commercial component on the vendors' lands - Something
that would not be permitted by the planning instruments. The Board• reaffirms its
direction for Mr. Faf:ber to inform all Parties as to the status of Trinity in respect of the
Aberdeen and Hamilton .Metal appealsl
Mr. Farber noted that there was an apparent sense of urgency on the City's and
McMaster's parts to at least have the McMaster Innovation Park proposal proceed as
Soon •as possible, which is why an April 2008 hearing date was set. However,• with
today's Order approving the December 2007 settlement (approving the zoning the•
permit the McMaster Innovation Park scheme to proceed), there is no need for the April
2008 hearing.
Could the Board reasonably require• the Trinity group to proceed on the April
date? The Board notes that the Trinity group joined these proceed!ngs in November
200•7, representing Aberdeen and Hamilton Metaÿls in their appeals. With the Parties'
-4- PL070386
proximity to the McMaster lands, Mr. Farber advised the Board that there is a
substantial amount of background work for the Trinity group to complete in order to
justify its project. In addition to determining the feasibility of the development itself
regarding environment issues, traffic, engineering, etc, there is also work to be done on
the justification for the proposed land use. The Board appreciates that the Trinity group
would• be unable to have a complete package ready to proceed in April. Further, the
City advised the Board that its planning department also requires sufficient time to
review the Trinity materials and time to allow for Public Consultation on what they will
propose.
In this regard, the Board determines that the timeframes are not feasible for all
Parties to meet and it hereby cancels the April 2008 hearing date. However, the Board
directs the three icomponents of• the Trinity group to have their completed materials filed
with the City of Hamilton on or before June 15, 2008 and to furnish electronic copies to
persons listed on the attached mailing list.
A sixth Pre-hearing conference will be held on Monday, September 15, 2008 at
10:00 a.m. in Hamilton. The Parties will keep the Board fully apprised of ongoing
discussions anddevelopments. In respect of the retainer issue, the Board may be
spoken to insofar as that matter results in confirmation of •Mr. Farber's status or
retention of alternate counsel. The Parties must also advise the Board whether there is
the potential for settlement discussions. Should such an opportunity not present itse!f,•
the Board intends to set a subsequent date for submission of a consolidated issues list
shortly after the September 15th date with a hearing date set for late-Fall 2008. Parties
are hereby notified through this Order to make themselves available for the Board-
assigned dates. No further notice will be given.
Having now received the finalized settlement document presented at •the
December 2007 Pre-hear.ing conference, the Board orders •that the appeal of The Gore
District Land Trustee Corporation on behalf of The Gore District Land Trust be allowed
in part. The Board amends the former City of Hamilton Official Plan with the attached
Official Plan Amendment (Attachment 1) in relation to 270 and 175 Longwood Road
South as shown on the Location Map (Attachment 2). The Board amends the City of
• Hamilton Zoning By-law with Zoning By-law No. 07-043 (Attachment 3) in relation to 270
and 175 Longwood Road South as shown on the Location Map. The Board orders that
-5- PL070386
Interim Control By-law 05-041, as extended by 06-028, be repealed over 270 and 175
Longwood Road as shown on the Location Map but will remain in full•force and effect in '
relation to the balance of the lands to which it appl!es.
The Member continues to be seized for the administrative management of this file
for the balance of the Trinity appeals.
So Orders the Board.
"R. Rossi"
R. ROSSI
MEMBER
PL070386
- 6 -
MAILING LIST
Alexandra Rawlings • sergio Manchia
Planning & Economic Development• Principal & Senior Planner
Committee Planning & Engineering Initiatives Ltd.
City of Hamilton 360 James Street N, Ste 200
City Clerk's Office, Corporate Hamilton ON L8L 1H5
Services
71 Main Street West, 7th Floor, City
Hall
Hamilton ON L8P 4Y5
The Gore District Land Trustee Hamilton Metal Trading Corp.•
• c/o Joel D. Farber
Corporation
c/o Randall Bocock and Eric Fogler Rubinoff- LLP
Nanayakkara 95 Wellington Street W.,
Solicitors Suite 1200 TD Centre
Evans, Philp LLP Toronto ON M5J 2Z9
One King Street West, Suite 1600
Hamilton ON L8P 1A4
Karen Partanen Director
Senior OMB & Information Coordinator Provincial Planning & Services Branch
• Municipal Programs & Education Branch Ministry of Municipal Affairs & Housing
Ministry of Municipal Affairs & Housing 777 Bay Street, Floor 14
777 Bay Street, 3rd Floor Toronto ON M5G 2E5
Toronto ON M5G 2E5
Clerk
City of Hamilton
12-21 King St W
Hamilton ON L8P 4W7
The following are Participants"
Jeff Bush Tony Greco
Director, Main West Esplanade BIA Director, Lock Street BIA
459 Main St. W. 230 1/2 Locke Street South
Hamilton, ON L8P 1K3 Hamilton, ON L8P 4B7
• . .• .•
- 7 - • PL070386
Adam Stewart John Wigle
President, Kirkendall Neighbourhood President, Ainslie Wood/Westdale
Association• Community Association of Resident
P.O. Box 25 Homeowners Inc.
180 James Street South 221-1063 King Street West
Hamilton, ON LSP 4Vl Hamilton, ON L8S 4S3
Sean Burak David Simpson
456 Herkimer Street Westdale Village BIA
Hamilton, ON 950 King Street W.
Hamilton, ON L8S 1K8
Keith Birch Stephanie Hilson
702-24 Tisdale Street South 26 Beulah Avenue
Hamilton, ON L8N 2V9 Hamilton, ON LSP 4G9
The following wish only to receive a
copy of the order:
Kim Wachta Neville Humm
39 Kipling Road 23 Rossmore Avenue
Hamilton, ON L8S 3X2 Hamilton, ON L8P 2N2
Dale Brown Joseph Rosati
203-77 James Street N, 4 Vinehill Drive
Hamilton, ON L8R 2K3 S'coney Creek, ON L8G 4Y5i
Amanda Hobbins for
Ted McMeekin, MPP
299 Dundas Street E.
PO Box 1240
Waterdown, ON L0R 2H0
PL070386
Attachment 3
Authority:. Item 14, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 07-003 (PED07005)
CM: February 15, 2007
Bill No. 043
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY, LAW NO. 07-043
To Amend By-law 05-200 to create a new Research and Development
Industrial Zone for the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has In force several Zorÿ By-laws which apply'
to the different areas Incorporated int0 the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act. 1999. S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities Identified in Section 1.7 of By-law 05-200;
AND wHEREAS it Is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensivelY
deal with zoning throughout the City;,
• AND wHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By.law is being enacted
and Iscoming into force and effect tn sevÿal stages;
AND wHEREAS, the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law 05-200,
came Into force on May 25, 2005, .and the second stage of the Zoning By-law,
ldelng By-law O6-166 to amend By-law 05-200, passed by Council on June 14,
2006 Is under appeal;
AND WHEREAS this By-law creates-a new Industrial - Research and
Development Zone amending certain provlelorÿsof By-law 05-200 not Includlng
those provisions which may be affected by the appeal of By-law 06-1661 and,
applying to the West Hamilton Innovation District lands within the City;,
AND WHEREAS the proposed change In zoning will be in conformlb/with
clal Plan for the City of Hamilton upon finalization of proposed Offldal Plan
Amendment No. 210.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamllton enacts as follows:
".€
,..."
PL070386
By-law to create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 2 of 18.
Section 2.1 of By-law 05.200. is amended by adding the following new
Im,
subsection:
"d) Industrial Classification
• Zone
Research and Development Zone
• 2..Section 2.3 of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding reference Map
numbered ÿSa, g49a, gSOa, 991,992a'.
umbered 908ÿ 949ÿ, 950ÿ; 991, 1F32ÿ atta(ÿl in Schedule ÿ1ÿ to this.By-
n 3 of By-law 05-200 is amended, by adding the foIImNing new.
deflnttlons in alphabetical order:. ....
"Blotechnologlcal Esfÿblishment Shall mean an estabrÿshment used for
the research, developmerÿ .appr auon,
prototypical manufacturing and
production of .bio-organlsms, which may
or may not be used in a manufacturing
process, and shall. In rlo way .be
construed to be the slaughtering,
eviscemUng, rendering, or deanlng of
meat, poultry, or fish 6r by-produÿts
thereof, or animal husbandry, or the
mlsingof animals.
Communications Establlshment Shall mean an i establishment used for
the broadcasting of information through
various media, and shÿl Include but not
be lim.lted to print,, television, radio and
ekÿnio media and vinlch:may Include
facilities for the pdnting or broadcasting
of Information but shall not Include .a call
centre.
Computer,.Electronio and Data Processing Establishment
Shall mean an establishment used for
the research, development, input,
.. prototyplcal manufacturing, processing
and printing, of data and. which may.,
include the design, manufacturing and
{
PL070386
By-law to create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 3 of 18
distribution of electronic equipment
and/or software.
• Manufacturing Shall mean the production, fabrication,
compounding, processing, paclmging,
chaffing, botUing, paÿng, recycling or
assembling of raw or semi.processed or
ful!y-processed goods or materials.
Motor Vehicle Service Station Shall mean an estal:ÿshment used for
the sale of fuel, automoUve accessories
and/or convenlenoe goods,, the repair or
replacement of parts In a motor vehicle
and shall Include but not be limited .to
the repair or replacement of mufflers,
exhaust systems, shock absorbers,
transmissions, gears, brakes, dutdl
assemblies, steering systems, tires,
wheels, windshields, windows and other
mechanical or electrical pads or
systems, the installation of
undercoating, engine tuning, lubrication
and engine conversion or replacement
but shall not include, a Motor Vehlde
Collision Repalr, Motor Vehicle Sales
and Se.rvice, Motor Vehicle Car Wash,
andlor a Motor Vehlcte Wreddng
EsbbllshrnenL
Pharmaceutical and Medical Esbbl!shment
Shall mean an. establ.lshment or part
thereof, where research, investigation,'
development, manufacturing and/or
technical experimentation, related to the
medical fÿId, Is carded out and shall
include but not be limited to clinical
testing, prototype, production facilities
and overnight paUent accommodation
related to such research, dlnical Hals,.
investigation or experimentation.
Pianned BusinessCentre Shall mean a group of business
establishments which is planned,
developed, managed and operated as a
unit with shared onmite parldng, and
PL070386
By4aw to create a newResearch and'Development Industrial Zone
Page 4 of 18
containing four or more separated
spaces for lease or occupancy,
Plantlng.Stdp Shall mean an area of land growing
ornamental shrubs or trees or. both,
suitable to the .sou and climatic
conditions of the area of land for the
sole purpose of providing a buffer. • '
Research and Development Establishment
8hall mean an establishmentor part
thereof, for the purpose of conducting
pure and applied research and
experimentation in any field of rÿcience,
medldne, technology and manufacturing.
and shall include but not be limited to
facilities such as. lecture rooms,
admlnistrative offices, . laboratories,
• tralnlng facilities, display-roomw-plloÿ
plants, pmtotypical manufacturing,
.simulating equipment and the like, and
service and machine shops to serve the
Research and Development
EstablishrnenL .
Science and TechnologyEstabIishment
Shall mean an establLshment where
sdentifio and technological research;
investigation, development,
manufacturing ' and/or technical
• experimentation Iscarried out and shall
kKÿlude but not be limited to fadlltles
such as laboratories, pilot plants and
prototype manufacturing.
Warehouse Shall mean a .building used for the bulk
storage and distribution of goods, but
shall not includethe retailing of goods.".
Section 3 of By-law 05.200 is amended by deleting the definition of 'Medical
Clinic" and replacing it with the following definition:.
'Medical Clinic Shall• mean a building, or pad thereof,.
which is used jointly.by three or more
• health professlonals for me purpose of
consuRatlon; diagnosis and/or treatment
PL070386
By-lawto create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 5 of 18
of persons and shall Include but not be
limited to laboratories, dispensaries or
other similar facilities, but shall not
InClude overnight accommodation for in-
patient care resulUng from surgery."
6. Section 5.1 a) v) Of Bptaw 05-200 is deleted and replaced with the following:
"V) Unless otherÿse regulatad. !n this By-law, parking spaces and aisles,
giving direct access to abutting parking spaces, excluding driveways
extending directly from the street, shall not be located within 3.0 metres
of a street line, and subject to a 3.0 metre vCAe planting strip being
required and permanently maintained between the street line and the
said parking spaces or aisle.
Section 5.6 of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the following new
1
subsection:
"C) Park!lig Schedule for All Zones, except Downtown Zones
-;0tun;ni Column 2
L Residential Uses
Multiple Dwelling 1 for each dweiiing uniL' expect where a
dwelling unit is 50 square metres in gross
floor area or less, In which case parking
shall be provided at a rate of 0.3 spaces
for each such uniL . ,
!!. ,,., Institutional Uses
Day Nursery I for each 125.0 SCluare metres of gross
floor area, which accommodates such use.
ii1., .Educational Uses
......... 5 for each classroom plus I for every ?
University, College
.seat capadty In an auditorium, theatre or
stadium or 5 spaces for every classroom
plus 1 space for each 23.0 square metres
of the gross f!oor area which
accommodates the auditorium, theatre or
stadium, whichever results in the greater
requiremen.t..
, i
iv. Commercial Uses
.
PL070386
By4aw to create a new Resehrÿ and Development Industrial Zone
Page•6 of 18
Conference or Convention 1 for each 50.0 square metres of gross
Centre floor area, which accg, mrnodates such use.
---=_ , ,, , .,,
Hotel 1 for each guest room.
Medical.Clinic,' Medical Ofÿce 1 for each 16.0 square metres of gross floor
area, which accommodates such use.
Motor Vehicle Service Station 4 for eaÿch service bay.. ' ....
Office 1'for each 30.Osquare metres of grOSS ficol
area, which accommodates such use,
Other Commercial Uses not I for each 30.0 square metres of gross tkx:>r
Usted Above area, which accommodates such Lÿe.
°
,,,,,
,o ,, .. , ,
v. Industrial Uses
Biotechnologlcal 1 for each 50.0 square metres of gross
Establishment floor area, which accommodates such use.
Communications
Establishment
Computer, Electronic and Data
Pr0ÿssing
Establishment
Laboratory
Pharmaceutkÿl and Mÿlicel
Establishment
Printing Establishment
Research and Development
Establishment (not
located In a M1 Zone)
Sdence and Technology
Establishment
Research and Development 1 for each 75.0 square metres of'gross
Establishment within an MI floor area, which accommodates such use,
Zone except for that portion of the building used
for laboratory, warehouse .or
manufacturing uses where .1 for each 115
square metres of gross floor area shall be
required.,
Manufacturing, 1 for each 115.0 square metres of gros.,
Warehouse floor area, which accommodates suet
USe."
PL070386
By-law to create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 7 of 18
By-law 05-200 iS amended by adding lhe following new Section:
q
"SECTION g: INDUSTRIAL ZONES
9.I R,,ESE/ÿ, CH AND DEVELOPMENT (MI) ZONE•
I _ • . _ i, ,,, ........... ;. __..
No person shah erect, or use any building in whole or in pad, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Research and Development (M1) Zone for any
pu .rpose other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory
thereto. Such erection or use shall also comply with the pmsc, dbed
regulations:
9,1,1 PERMITTED USES BIotÿk)glcal Estabtishment
Commercial Parking Facility
Communicatk)ns Establishment
Computer, Electronic 6ÿ Data
Processing Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Day Numery
Financial Establishment
Hotel
Laboratory ...
Manufacturing
Medical Clinio
Medical Office.
Motor Vehicle SeMce Station
• Office
P6rsonal Servicÿ
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment
Pdnting Establishment
Repair 8ervkÿ
Research. and Development
Establishment
Restaurant
Retail
Science and Techno1ÿjy Establishment
Warehouse
9.1:2 PROHIBITED USES Notwithstanding Seÿ0n 9.1.1, a drive
lhrouÿh facility is a prohibited use, along
with the following types of manufacturing
uses, except If these uses are consldered
only as an accessory use to another
permitted manufacturing use:
• . "'-, °" • , *,. °
....." •
PL070386•
By-law tO create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 8 of 18
Beverage Distillation
Manufacturing of Asbestos, Phosphate or
Sulphur.Products
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, .Plastic, Asphalt
or Cement; not Including mixing,
• blending, treatment " or . similar
process
Processing or Refining .of Petroleum or
Coal ;..
Processing, Millÿg or Paclÿsÿjÿng of
Anlmal Feed
Salvage, Recycling or Scrap Yard"
• Slaughtering, Eviscerating, Rendering or
Ciea..ning Qf Meat, Poultry or Rsh
or by-producÿs thereof
Smelting, Refining, Rolling, Forging, or
Extruding of Ore orMetal
Stamping, Blanking or P{.mÿh-Pmssidg of
Metal .
Tanning or Chemical Processing of Pelts
or Leather "
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
. F-xploÿves Manufacturing
• Pulp and Paper Mills
9.1,3 REGULATIONS
' a) Maximum Yard Abutting Maximum 2;0 metres for the.
a Street ground .floor Of a building, except
where a .visibility triangle shall be
provided for a driveway access;
and,
5) Notwithstanding i) above, for any
lot abutting the existing Ffld Street
and Chatham Street, no minimum
or .maximum yard shaÿ apply, "
b) Maximum Building 38,0 metres .
.Height
c) Maxtmum Gross Floor No officÿ building shall have a gross floor
Area .for Office Use area of 10,000 square metres or greater.
"+ .
PL070386
By-law to create a new Research and Deve!opment Industrial Zone.
Page 9 of 18.
d). Parking I) In , accordance with the
requirements of Section 5;
=i) Notwithÿndlng Section 5.6.c) iv.
of this By-law, no paddng shall be
required for any the following uses:
Financial Establishment;
Personal Services;
Restaurant;
Retail.
e) Location and Screening Outdoor Stomge and Outdoor Assembly'
of Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equtprnent shall be
Outdoor Assembly permittÿ only as an accessory use and
Shall be screened from view from any
abutting street by.a visual barrier In
accordance with Section 4,19 of this By-
law.
0 Size and Location ,3 Except where located withIn an
Restrldÿn of existing Banned Business Centre,
Commerdal and. the followiÿ uses shall only be
• Institutional Uses withirÿ permitted on the ground floor of a
a Building building Inwhich the building has a
• mlnlmum gross floor area of 2,000
"ssqtouraerye b muieldtrinegs hheaivgihntg: a mlnÿurn 2
Day Nursery;,
Financial Establishment;
Personal Services;
Restaurant;
Retail.
ll)
In the case of i).above, the second
storey shall not be less than 75% .
of the .gross floor area of the
ground floor,
iii) An tÿMduat retail establishment
shall be restricted to a maximum
gross floor area of 500 square
metres,.
o
• . PL070386
By4aw to create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 10 of ÿ 8
0) Logan of The following uses shaU only be permitted
Manufacturing, within an existing building:
• Motor Vehicle Service
Station, Repair Service, Manufacturing;
and Warehouse Uses Motor Vehlde Service Station; •
Repair Service;
Warehouse."
,Schedule "C" of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding addlt!onal s pscla!
exceptions as follows:
"6. Notwithstanding Sections 9,1.! and 9.13 of this By4aw, within the
boundaries Of the lands affected by this subsection and zoned
Research and Development (M1) Zone, Identified on Maps 950a and
992a of Schedule "Aÿ- Zoning Maps, the followingshall aPl:ÿ.
a. The existing railway use shall also be permitted, including any new
use, building or structure accessory theretoÿ and subject to the
planUng strip in subsection (c) below not required for such use.
• b. The building height •.shall not exceed a height of 22.0 metres when
located within 60.0 metres of a Residential zone; and,
c, 'A 6.0 metre planting strip shall be required along that portion of the
property line abutting a railway rlght-of-way.
Notwithstanding Sections 0.1.1 and 9.1.3 of fills By4aw, within the
7.
boundaries of the lands affected by this subsection and Zoned
Research and Development (M!) Zone, Identified on Maps 949a, 950a
and 99i of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following shall also apply:
A Museum shall also be permitted; and,
a.
°. Educational Establishment and'Multiple Dwelling uses shall also be
b,
permitted, subject to the following regulations:
Jb " TheMaximum Gross Floor Area for Educational
Establishment shall be limited to 14,000 square metres and.
,Multiple Dwelling shall be limited to 5,750 square metres;
PL070386
By-taw to create a new Research and Development Industrial Zone
Page 11 of 1ÿ,
l[°' Notwithstanding (i) above, theMaximum Gross Floor Area
• for Educational Establishment(s) may be Increased beyond
the 14,000 square metres, to a maxlmum of 46,500 square
metres, provided that any additional gross floor area for such
educational use shall be llmited to a maximum of 33% of the
total gross floor area of all existtng buildings, which are used
for other permitted M1 uses, located on the said lands, save
• and exceptfor the following uses:
1. Educational Establishments;
2. Multiple OwellingCs);
3. Commercÿl Parking Facilities; and,
4. . Warÿhouÿ (as a primary use).
iii.• Notwithstanding (i) above, the Maximum Gross FLoor Area
for Multiple Dwelling(a) may be increased beyond the 6,750
square metres, to a maximum of .11,500 square metres,
pmvtded that any additional, gross floor area for suda
multiple dwelling use shall be llmlted to a maximum of 8% of
'the total gross floor ÿ of all existing butldings, which are
• used for other permitted MJ uses, located on the said lands,
save and except forthe following uses:
Educational Establishments; •
•1.
2. Multiple .Dwelllng(s);
3. Commercial Parkl.ng Facilities; and,
4. Warehouse (as a primary use),
IV. MuiUple dwellings shall be restricted to locating Jrl a
maximum of 2 buildings.
Notwithstanding (li) and (I!i) above, the combined total gross
Vt
floor area acoommodatlng both Educational Establishment
and Multiple Dwelling uses shall not exceed 46,600 square
metres."
10. The Clorkbe hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
• noÿJce of the passing of this Byqaw, in ae, cordance wKh the Flanniÿ Act..
lÿa,
/
/
N m
"U
i.
FO-
0
O)
PL070386
!1,
I
i I
..
l
0
CO
CO
0
0
_.1
O.



Content from 07049 to amend bylaw 06166 open space and parks zoningpdf:
Authority: Item 21, Economic Development
& Planning Committee
Report 07-003- (PEDO6152a)
CM: February 15,2007
Bill No. 049
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO 07-049
To Rescind Zoning Maps 826,827 and 868 from the Open Space and Parks
Zoning Bylaw 06-166
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply
to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of By-law 05-200;
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively
deal with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By-law is being enacted
and is coming into force and effect in several stages;
AND WHEREAS, the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law 05-200,
came into force on May 25, 2005, and the second stage of the Zoning By-law,
being By-law 06-166 to amend By-law 05-200, passed by Council on June 14,
2006 is under appeal;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” of By-law 06-166 is amended by deleting Zoning Maps 826, 827
and 868.
2. Section 2.3 of By-law 06-166 is amended by deleting reference to Zoning
Maps 826,827 and 868.
To Rescind Zoning Maps 826,827 and 868 from the Open Space and Parks
Zoning By-law 06-166
(Page 2 of 2)
3. The Clerk be hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
notice of the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Planning Act.
PASSED and ENACTED this 15'h day of February, 2006.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor Clerk
CI-06-1



Content from 07101 to amend zoning bylaw no 05200pdf:
Authority: Item 20, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 07-003 (PED06405a)
CM: February 14,2007
Bill No. 101
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-101
To Amend By-law 05-200 to create new Institutional Zones for the City of
Hamilton
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply
to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of By-law 05-200;
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively
deal with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By-law is being enacted
and is coming into force and effect in several stages;
AND WHEREAS, the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law 05-200,
came into force on May 25, 2005, and the second stage of the Zoning By-law,
being By-law 06-166 to amend By-law 05-200, passed by Council on June 14,
2006 is under appeal;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is the third stage of the Zoning By-law: amending
certain provisions of By-law 05-200 not including those provisions which may be
affected by the appeal of By-law 06-166; and, applying to the Institutional lands
within the Urban Area of the City, as hereinafter described and depicted;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. The fourth recital of By-law 05-200 is amended by deleting the phrase “will
be enacted and come into force and effect” and replacing it with the phrase
“is being enacted and is coming into force and effect”.
2. The fifth and sixth recitals of By-law 05-200 are deleted.
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
3. Section 2.1 of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the following new
subsection:
“c) Institutional Classification
Zones Zone Symbol
Neighbourhood Institutional Zone I1
Community Institutional Zone I2
Major Institutional Zone I3
“
4. Schedule “A” of By-law 05-200 is amended by incorporating the Institutional
Zone boundaries as shown on the Maps numbered 445, 481-482, 515-516,
817, 819-820, 825, 827, 859-861, 863-864, 866-867, 869, 871, 877, 901-
902, 906-912, 919, 942-943, 945, 948, 951-956, 960-962, 989-990, 992-996,
998-10 01, 1003, 1036-10 47, 1079-10 87, 10 90-10 93, 11 28, I1 31- 1 137,
1140, 114 4-1 145, 117 4-1 176, 1180-11 88, 1190, 1192-11 98, 1228-1231,
1234-12 36, 1238-12 43, 1245, 1247-12 53, 1279-12 81 , 1287-12 94, 1299,
1301- 1 306, 1332-13 34, 1339-13 46, 1348, 1364, 1385-13 87, 1392, 1395-
1396, 1398-13 99, 1403, 1436, 1447-14 51 , 1454-14 55, 1502-15 04, 1550-
1551, 1596 attached in Schedule “I”of this By-law into the Maps with the
same numbers attached in Schedule “A” of By-law 05-200.
5. Section 2.3 of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding Map numbers 444, 446,
480, 865, 903, 905, 947, 949, 988, 997, 1089, 1127, 1129, 1130, 1138,
1139, 1141, 1143, 1146, 1179, 1189, 1199, 1232, 1233, 1237, 1246, 1295,
1397,1435,1445,1453, q549,1552,1748,1749.
6. Schedule “A” of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the following Maps
numbered 444,446,480,903,947,949,988,997,1089,1127, 1129, 1130,
1138, 1139, 1141, 1143, 1146, 1179, 1189, 1199, 1232, 1233, 1237, 1246,
1295,1397,1435,1445,1453,1549,1552,1748,1749
7. The definition of “building height” in Section 3 of By-law 05-200 is amended
by adding the words “bell tower” between “ornamental figure” and “or”.
8. Section 4.8 of By-law 05-200 is amended by deleting the phrase
“RESIDENTIAL DOWNTOWN D5 AND DOWNTOWN D6 ZONES” in the
heading and replacing it with the phrase “RESIDENTIAL DOWNTOWN D5,
DOWNTOWN D6 AND INSTITUTIONAL ZONES.
9. Section 4.10 of By-law 05-200 is amended by deleting the phrase
“Downtown D5 or Downtown D6 Zone” and replacing it with the phrase
“Downtown D5 Zone, Downtown D6 Zone or Institutional Zone.
10. Subsection 4.12 b) of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the phrase “and
Institutional Zones” between “Downtown Zones” and “of‘.
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
11. Section 5.6 of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the following new
subsection:
“c) Parking Schedule for All Zones, except the Downtown Zones
Column 1 Column 2
i. Residential Uses
Single Detached Dwelling, 1 for each dwelling unit
Semi-Detached Dwelling,
Duplex Dwelling
Dwelling Unit
Multiple Dwelling 1 for each dwelling unit, except where
Street Townhouse Dwelling a dwelling unit is 50 square metres in
gross floor area or less, in which case,
parking shall be provided at a rate of
0.3 spaces for each such unit.
Residential Care Facility, 1 for each 3 persons accommodated or
Emergency Shelter, designed for accommodation.
Corrections Residence,
Lodging House, Retirement
Home
ii. Institutional Uses
Long Term Care Facility 1 for each 3 patient beds.
Day Nursery 1 for each 125.0 square metres of
gross floor area which accommodates
such use.
Place of Worship 1 for every classroom plus 1 for each 7
seat capacity in that part of the building
used for worship or 1 for every
classroom plus 1 for each 23.0 square
metres of floor area used for hall,
auditorium or similar use involving the
assembly of persons not including the
place of worship, whichever results in
the areater reauirement.
Hospital 1 for each 100.0 square metres of
which gross floor area which
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
accommodates such use.
iii. Educational Uses
Elementary School 1.25 for each classroom.
Secondary School 3 for each classroom plus 1 for each 7
seat capacity in an auditorium, theatre
or stadium
~ U~~ niversity, College 5 for each classroom plus 1 for every 7
seat capacity in an auditorium, theatre
or stadium or 5 spaces for every
classroom plus 1 space for each 23.0
square metres of the gross floor area
which accommodates the auditorium,
theatre or stadium, whichever results in
greater requirement.
iv. Commercial Uses
Medical Clinic, Medical Office 1 for each 16 square metres of gross
floor area
12. Section 5.6, of By-law 05-200, is amended adding the following new
subsection:
“d) Notwithstanding Subsection c) herein, for a hospital or Place of
Worship use within any Zone located in all or part of a building
existing on the effective date of this By-law, no parking spaces are
required provided that the number of parking spaces which existed
on the effective date of this By-law shall continue to be provided
and maintained. Where an addition, alteration or expansion of an
existing building is proposed, the parking requirements of Section
5.6 c) above, shall only apply to the increased gross floor area of
the building.”
13. By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the following new Section 8:
“SECTION 8: INSTITUTIONAL ZONES
8.1 NEIGHBOURHOOD INSTITUTIONAL (11) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Neighbourhood Institutional (11) Zone for any
purpose other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory
thereto. Such erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed
regulations:
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
PERMITTED Day Nursery
USES Duplex Dwelling
Educational Establishment
Emergency Shelter
Home Business
Museum
Place of Worship
Residential Care Facility
Retirement Home
Semi-Detached Dwelling
Single Detached Dwelling
PROHIBITED Educational Establishment consisting of a
USES Secondary School, College or University
REGULATIONS
EMERGENCY SHELTER,
RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITY, PLACE OF
WORSHIP AND
RETIREMENT HOME
REGULATIONS
Minimum Lot Area 330.0 square metres
Maximum Lot Area for a 1.0 hectare
Place of Worship
Minimum Lot Width 12.0 metres
Minimum Front Yard 6.0 metres
Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres
Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
Maximum Capacity for Shall not exceed 15 residents
Residential Care Facility
and Retirement Home
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
j) Location of Emergency i) Except as provided for in
Shelter and Residential Subsection ii), herein, every
Care Facility Emergency Shelter or
Residential Care Facility
shall be situated on a lot
having a minimum radial
separation distance of 300
metres from any lot line of
such lot measured to the lot
line of any other lot
occupied by a Residential
Care Facility, Emergency
Shelter, Corrections
Residence or Correct ionaI
Facility.
ii) Where the radial separation
distance from the lot line of
an Emergency Shelter or
Residential Care Facility
existing as of the effective
date of this By-law, is less
than 300 metres to the lot
line of any other lot
occupied by an existing
Residential Care Facility,
Emergency Shelter,
Corrections Residence or
Correctional Facility, the
existing Residential Care
Facility may be expanded
or rede velo ped to
accommodate not more
than the permitted number
of residents permitted by
the Zone in which it is
located.
k) Parking In accordance with the
requirements of Section 5 of this
B y-la w .
I) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.8 of this
By-law.
By-law to create new Institutional Zones
EDUCATIONAL
ESTABLISHM E NT AND
MUSEUM REGU L ATlO NS
Minimum Yard 6.0 metres where property line
abuts a Residential Zone property
line.
Maximum Building Height i) 10.5 metres;
ii) In addition to i) above,
maximum building height
may be equivalently
increased as yard increases
beyond minimum yard
requirement, established in
8.1.3.2 a) above.
Parking In accordance with the
requirements of Section 5 of this
By-law.
Accessory B ui I di n gs In accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.8 of this
By-law.
8.1.3.3 SINGLE DETACHED
DWELLING, DUPLEX
DWELLING AND DAY
NURSERY
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 0 330.0 square metres;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
360.0 square metres shall
be required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Lot Width i) 12.0 metres
ii ) 15.0 metres for a corner lot
c) Minimum Front Yard i) 4.5 metres; and,
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
ii) 5.8 metres for an attached
garage.
d) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres
e) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
h) Parking In accordance with the
requirements of Section 5 of this
By -l aw .
i) Accessory Building In accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.8 of this
By-law.
8.1.3.4 SEMI-DETACHED
DWELL1N G
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area i) 210.0 square metres for
each semi-detached
dwelling unit.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
240.0 square metres shall
be required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Lot Width for Unit i) 7.5 metres for each
dwelling unit in each semi-
detached dwelling.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
9.3 metres shall be
required for a corner unit.
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
c) Minimum Front Yard i) 4.5 metres; and,
ii) 5.8 metres for an attached
garage.
d) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres, except for the side yard
related to the common wall of the
semi-detached dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre
side yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
h) Parking In accordance with the
requirements of Section 5 of this
By-I a w .
i) Accessory Building In accordance with the
requirements of Section 4.8 of this
By-law.
8.1.3.5 HOME BUSINESS
REG UL ATlONS
In accordance with the requirements of Section 4.21 of this By-
law.
8.2 COMMUNITY INSTITUTIONAL (12) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Community Institutional (12) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto.
Such erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
By-law to create new Institutional Zones
8.2.1 PERMITTED USES Day Nursery
Duplex Dwelling
Educational Establishment
Emergency Shelter
Home Business
Museum
Recreation
Place of Worship
Residential Care Facility
Retirement Home
Semi-Detached Dwelling
Single Detached Dwelling
Social Services Establishment
Street Townhouse Dwelling
8.2.2 PROHIBITED USES Educational Establishment
consisting of a College or
University.
8.2.3 REGU L ATlON S
8.2.3.1 EMERGENCY SHELTER,
PLACE OF WORSHIP,
RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITY, RETIREMENT
HOME AND SOCIAL
SERVICES
ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Width 30.0 metres
b) Minimum Front Yard 3.0 metres
c) Minimum Side Yard and 6.0 metres
Flankage Yard
d) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
e) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
f) Minimum Landscaped 10% of the lot area
Area
By-law to create new Institutional Zones
g) Maximum Capacity for Shall not exceed 50 residents
Emergency Shelter,
Residential Care Facility
and Retirement Home
h) Location of Emergency ii) Except as provided for in
Shelter and Residential Subsection ii), herein, every
Care Facility Emergency Shelter or
Residential Care Facility shall
be situated on a lot having a
minimum radial separation
distance of 300 metres from
any lot line of such lot
measured to the lot line of any
other lot occupied by a
Residential Care Facility,
Emergency Shelter,
Corrections Residence or
Correctional Facility.
iii) Where the radial separation
distance from the lot line of an
Emergency Shelter, or
Residential Care Facility
existing as of the effective
date of this By-law, is less
than 300 metres to the lot line
of any other lot occupied by an
existing Residential Care
Facility, Emergency Shelter,
Corrections Residence or
Correctional Facility, the
existing Residential Care
Facility may be expanded or
redeveloped to accommodate
not more than the permitted
number of residents permitted
by the Zone in which it is
located.
i) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
j) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
EDUCATIONAL
ESTABLISHMENT,
MUSEUM AND
RECREATION
REGULATIONS
Minimum Yard 6.0 metres where property line abuts
a Residential Zone property line.
Maximum Building Height i) 10.5 metres;
ii) In addition to i) above,
maximum building height
may be equivalently
increased as yard increases
beyond minimum yard
requirement, established in
8.2.3.2 a) above.
Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
SINGLE DETACHED
DWELLING, DUPLEX
DWELLING AND DAY
NURSERY
REGULATIONS
Minimum Lot Area i) 330.0 square metres;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
360.0 square metres shall be
required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Lot Width iii) 12.0 metres;
iv) Notwithstanding i) above,
15.0 metres shall be required
for a corner lot.
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
c) Minimum Front Yard i) 4.5 metres; and,
ii) 5.8 metres for an attached
garage.
d) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres
e) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
8.2.3.4 S EM I -D ETACH E D
DWELLING
REGU L ATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area for Unit 210.0 square metres for each
semi-detached dwelling unit.
Notwithstanding i) above,
240.0 square metres shall be
required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Lot Width for 7.5 metres for each dwelling
Unit unit in a semi-detached
dwelling.
Notwithstanding i) above, 9.3
metres shall be required for a
corner unit.
c) Minimum Front Yard 4.5 metres; and,
5.8 metres for an attached
garage.
By-law to create new Institutional Zones
d) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres, except for the side yard
related to the common wall of the
semi-detached dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
8.2.3.5 STREETTOWNHOUSE
DWELLING
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area for Unit i) 165.0 square metres for each
dwelling unit.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
195.0 square metres shall be
required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Unit Width 6.0 metres
c) Minimum Front Yard i) 4.5 metres; and,
ii) 5.8 metres for an attached
garage.
d) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres except for the side yard
related to the common wall of the
street townhouse dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
I
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
8.2.3.6 HOME BUSINESS
REGULATlONS
I
In accordance with the
requirements of Section
4.21 of this' By-law.
8.3 MAJOR INSTITUTIONAL (13) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land
in whole or in part, within a Major Institutional (13) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall blso comply with the prescribed regulations:
8.3.1 PERMITTED USES Day Nursery
Educational Establishment
Emergency Shelter
Home Business
Hospital
Lodging House
Long Term Care Facility
Medical Clinic
Medical Office
Multiple Dwelling
Place of Worship
Recreation
Residential Care Facility
Retirement Home
Social Services Establishment
Street Townhouse Dwelling
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
8.3.2 REGU LATIONS
8.3.2.1 EMERGENCY SHELTER,
LONG TERM CARE
FACILITY, PLACE OF
WORSHIP,
RESIDENTIAL CARE
FACILITY, RETIREMENT
HOME AND SOCIAL
SERVICES
ESTABLISHMENT
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Width 30.0 metres
b) Minimum Side and Rear 7.0 metres
Yard
c) Maximum Building Height 18.0 metres
d) Minimum Landscaped 10% of the lot area
Area
e) Maximum Capacity for Shall not exceed 50 residents
Residential Care Facility
f) Location of Emergency iv) Except as provided for in
Shelter and Residential Subsection ii), herein, every
Care Facility Emergency Shelter or
Residential Care Facility shall
be situated on a lot having a
minimum radial separation
distance of 300 metres from any
lot line of such lot measured to
the lot line of any other lot
occupied by a Residential Care
Facility, Emergency Shelter,
Corrections Residence or
Correctional Facility.
v) Where the radial separation
distance from the lot line of an
Emergency Shelter, or
Residential Care Facility existing
as of the effective date of this
By-law, is less than 300 metres
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
to the lot line of any other lot
occupied by an existing
Residential Care Facility,
Emergency Shelter, Corrections
Residence or Correctional
Facility, the existing Residential
Care Facility may be expanded
or redeveloped to accommodate
not more than the permitted
number of residents permitted
by the Zone in which it is
located.
g) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
h) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
8.3.2.2 EDUCATIONAL
ESTABLISHMENT,
H0 sP ITAL, LODGING
HOUSE, MEDICAL
CLINIC, MEDICAL
OFFICE, MULTIPLE
DWELLING AND
RECREATION
REGU LATlON S
a) Minimum Side and Rear 6.0 metres where property line abuts
Yard a Residential Zone property line.
b) Maximum Building Height i) 18.0 metres;
ii) In addition to i) above, maximum
building height may be
equivalently increased as yard
increases beyond minimum yard
requirement, established in
8.3.2.2 a) above
c) Location of Multiple Shall only be permitted on the same
Dwelling and Lodging lot as an Educational Establishment
House
By-law to create new Institutional Zones
d) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
e) Accessory Building In accorda nce with the
requirements of Section 4.8 of this
By -I aw .
8.3.2.3 STREETTOWNHOUSE
DWELLING
REGULATIONS
I
a) Minimum Lot Area for Unit i) 165.0 square metres for each
dwelling unit.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
195.0 square metres shall be
required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Unit Width 6.0 metres
c) Minimum Front Yard i) 4.5 metres; and,
I
ii) 5.8 metres for an attached
g a rage.
d) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres except for the side yard
related to the common wall of the
street townhouse dwelling unit, in
which case a minimum 0 metre side
yard shall be permitted.
e) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
f) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
g) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
I
h) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
i) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
8.3.2.4 DAY NURSERY
REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area i) 330.0 square metres
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
360.0 square metres shall be
required for a corner lot.
b) Minimum Front Yard i) 4.5 metres; and,
ii) 5.8 metres for an attached
garage
c) Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres
d) Minimum Flankage Yard 3.0 metres
e) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
f) Maximum Building Height 10.5 metres
g) Parking In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
h) Accessory Building In accordance with the requirements
of Section 4.8 of this By-law.
8.3.2.5 HOME BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
In accordance with the requirements of Section 4.21 of this By-law.
14. Schedule “C” of, By-law 05-200, is amended by adding additional special
exceptions as follows:
“4. Notwithstanding section 8.1.3.1 i) of this By-law, the following
Maximum Capacity shall be permitted for the respective property.
i) 12 Melville Street, as identified on Map 861 of Schedule “A” -
Zoning Maps, 24 residents
ii) 46 West Avenue South, as identified on Map 995 of Schedule
“A” - Zoning Maps, 20 residents
iii) 160 Park Street South, as identified on Map 952, 994 of
Schedule “A” - Zoning Maps, 20 residents
Bylaw to create new Institutional Zones
iv) 65 East Avenue South, as identified on Map 995, 996 of
Schedule “A” - Zoning Maps, 20 residents
v) 7 Blake Street, as identified on Map 997, 1041 of Schedule “A”
- Zoning Maps, 40 residents
5. Notwithstanding section 8.2.3.1 g) of this By-law, the Maximum
Capacity for 1320-13 22 King Street East shall be 64 residents.”
15. The Clerk be hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving
of notice of the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Planninq
-Act.
16. This By-law No. 07-101 shall come into force and be deemed to come
into force in accordance with subsection 34(21) of the Planning Act
either upon the date of passage of this By-law or as otherwise provided
by the said subsection.
PASSED and ENACTED this 28‘h day of March, 2007
Fred Eisenberger evin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 07111 to amend zoning bylaw no 05200  housekeeping amendmentspdf:
Authority: Item 7, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 07-006 (PED07093)
CM: April 11, 2007
Bill No. 111
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-111
Housekeeping Amendments to Bylaw 05-200
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply
to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of By-law 05-200;
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to deal
comprehensively with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law 05-200, came
into force on May 25, 2005;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for housekeeping amendments to By-law
05-200, as hereinafter described and depicted;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 2.3 of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding reference to “Map
numbers 383, 384, 412, 415, 447, 483, 484, 514, 517, 518, 548, 551, 580,
581, 582, 61 1, 612, 613, 642, 744, 749, 750, 751, 779, 787, 788, 789, 790,
791, 792, 821, 829, 830, 833, 857, 858, 872, 873, 874, 875, 876, 914, 915,
916, 917, 918, 941, 986, 987, 991, 1002, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031,
1032, 1034, 1048, 1052, 1074, 1075, 1076, 1077, 1094, 1095, 1096, 1099,
1101, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1147, 1148, 1151, 1153, 1172, 1200, 1201, 1202,
1203, 1204, 1226, 1254, 1255, 1256, 1257, 1258, 1278, 1282, 1285, 1297,
1307, 1309, 1310, 1313, 1331, 1337, 1338, 1350, 1351, 1353, 1359, 1363,
1383, 1384, 1388, 1389, 1402, 1406, 1433, 1434, 1444, 1452, 1457, 1481,
1482, 1483, 1484, 1492, 1493, 1501, 1505, 1506, 1528, 1529, 1530, 1531,
1541,1544,1545,1548,1573,1574,1583,1584,1585,1592,1593,1594,
Housekeeping Amendments to By-law 05-200
Page 2 of 2
1627, 1628, 1629, 1636, 1637, 1638, 1639, 1640, 1641, 1670, 1671, 1677,
1678, 1681, 1682, 1710, 1711, 1717, 1747, 1784, 1785, 1786, 1818, 1819,
1884, 1885, 1887, 1909, 1910, 1911, 1912, 1932, 1933, 1934, 1935, 1954,
1955, 1956, 1957”.
2. Schedule “A” of By-law 05-200 is amended by adding the following Maps
numbered 383, 384, 412, 415, 447, 483, 484, 514, 517, 518, 548, 551, 580,
581, 582, 61 1, 612, 61 3, 642, 744, 749, 750, 751, 779, 787, 788, 789, 790,
791, 792, 821, 829, 830, 833, 857, 858, 872, 873, 874, 875, 876, 914, 915,
916, 917, 918, 941, 986, 987, 991, 1002, 1027, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031,
1032, 1034, 1048, 1052, 1074, 1075, 1076, 1077, 1094, 1095, 1096, 1099,
1101, 1121, 1122, 1123, 1147, 1148, 1151, 1153, 1172, 1200, 1201, 1202,
1203, 204, 1226, 1254, 1255, 1256, 1257, 1258, 1278, 1282, 1285, 297,
1307, 309, 1310, 1313, 1331, 1337, 1338, 1350, 1351, 1353, 1359, 363,
1383, 384, 1388, 1389, 1402, 1406, 1433, 1434, 1444, 1452, 1457, 481,
1482, 483, 1484, 1492, 1493, 1501, 1505, 1506, 1528, 1529, 1530, 531,
1541, 544, 1545, 1548, 1573, 1574, 1583, 1584, 1585, 1592, 1593, 594,
1627, 628, 1629, 1636, 1637, 1638, 1639, 1640, 1641, 1670, 1671, 677,
1678, 1681, 1682, 1710, 1711, 1717, 1747, 1784, 1785, 1786, 1818, 1819,
1884, 1885, 1887, 1909, 1910, 1911, 1912, 1932, 1933, 1934, 1935, 1954,
1955, 1956, 1957, all as attached as Schedule “A” to this By-law.
3. The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
notice of the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Planning Act.
PASSED and ENACTED this 11 day of April, 2007
th
n n
Mayor City Clerk
CI-07-B



Content from 07136 omb file no pl060290  to amend zoning bylaw 06038pdf:
ISSUE DATE:
PL060290
Dec t0, 2009
Ontario
Ontario Municipal Board
Commission des affaires municipales de I'Ontario
Victor J Veri and Fred Spencer have appealed to the Ontario Municipal Board under
subsection 34(19) of the Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.13, as amended, against
Zoning By-law 06-038 of the City of Hamilton
OMB File No. R060068
BEFORE:
J. McKenzie ) Thursday, the 10th day
)
Vice Chair ) of December, 2009
UPON APPEAL TO THIS BOARD, and the Board having been advised by Senior
Council to the City of Hamilton that sections were either omitted or misnumbered from
By-law 06-038, which was included with Decision/Order 0634, dated March 13, 2007;
THE BOARD ORDERS that Decision/Order 0634 is hereby amended by replacing By-
law 06-038 with the attached modified By-law;
In all other respects the Decision remains the same.
SECRETARY
DEC ! 8 2009
Authority: Item , Planning and Economic
Development Committee
Report
CM:
Bill No.
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO.
To Amend:
Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster);
Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas);
Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough);
Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook);
Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton);
Zoning By-law No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek), and
Zoning By-law No. 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
Respecting:
PROHIBITION OF USE OF LAND WITHOUT ADEQUATE SERVICES
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, Statutes of Ontario, 1999 Chap.
14, Sch. C. did incorporate, as of January 1, ÿ2001, the municipality "City of
Hamilton";
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the successor to the former area
municipalities known as the "The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster", "The
Corporation of the Town of Dundas", "The Corporation of the Town of
Flamborough", "The Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook", "The Corporation
of the City of Hamilton", and "The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek", and is
the successor to the former Regional Municipality, namely, "The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth";
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, provides that the Zoning
By-laws and Official Plans of the former area municipalities and the Official Plan of
the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth continue in force in the
City of Hamilton until subsequently amended or repealed by the Council of the City
of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster
passed Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) on the 22nd day of June 1987,
which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order on the 23rd
day of January, 1989;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Dundas
passed Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas) on the 22nd day of May 1986, which
by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 10th day
of May 1988;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Town of
Flamborough passed Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough) on the 5th day of
November 1990, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by
Order dated the 21st day of December 1992;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Township of
Glanbrook passed Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook) on the 16th day of March
1992, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated
the 31st day of May 1993;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the City of Hamilton
passed Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) on the 25th day of July 1950, which by-
law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 7th day Of
December 1951, (File No. P.F.C. 3821);
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the City of Stoney
Creek passed Zoning By-law No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) on the 8th day of
December 1992, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by
Order dated the 31st day of May, 1994;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton passed Zoning By-
law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton) on the 25th day of May, 2005 which came into
effect on the same date;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is in conformity with the Official Plan of the
former City of Hamilton, the Official Plan of the former Town of Ancaster, the
Official Plan of the former Town of Dundas, the Official Plan of the former Town
of Flamborough, the Official Plan of the former Township of Glanbrook, the
Official Plan of the City of Stoney Creek);
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton, in adopting Item of
Report of the Planning and Economic Development Committee at its meeting
held on the day of recommended that Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster),
Zoning By-law No. 358t-86 (Dundas), Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough),
Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook), Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton), Zoning
By-law 3692-92 (Stoney Creek), and Zoning By-law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
be amended as hereinafter provided.
AND WHEREAS the owner of any land, building or structure affected by this
by-law may appear as a delegation before the appropriate Committee of Council in
accordance with the City's Procedura! By-law;
AND WHEREAS under Section 45(1) of the Planning Act, the Committee of
Adjustment, upon the application of the owner of any land, building or structure
affected by this by-law, may authorize such minor variance from the provisions of
this by-law as in its opinion is desirable for the appropriate development or use of
the land, building or structure, if in the opinion of the Committee of Adjustment the
general intent and purpose of this by-law and the official plan are maintained,
herein referred to as a "minor variance application";
AND WHEREAS in applying the Planning Act test to decide a minor
variance application, the Committee of Adjustment may consider such evidence as
it deems relevant, including, but not limited to, the position of the General Manager
of the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate and any other engineering opinions/reports presented to it;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Town of Ancaster
.
(a) Section 7 of Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) is hereby amended
by adding the following new subsection:
"7.29 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 7.27 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision,
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate."
2. Town of Dundas
(a) Section 6 of Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
"6.25 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 6.19.3a - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used or
occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate."
3. Town of Flamborough
(a) Section 5 of Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
"5.37 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 5.35 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision,
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate."
4. Township of Glanbrook
(a) Section 7 of Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook)is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
"7.42 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 7.40 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used or
occupied unless:
i) adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-
lieu of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton
Parkland Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate."
5. City of Hamilton
(a) Section 6 of Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) is hereby amended
by adding the following new subsection:
"(22) ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 6.(20) - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used or
occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate."
6. City of Stoney Creek
(a) Section 4.4 of Zoning By-law 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
"4.4.11
Except for Section 4.20 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision,
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Official and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate."
7. Zoning By-law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
(a) Section 4 of Zoning By-law 05-200 - General Provisions is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
"4.22 ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 4.15 of Zoning By-law No. 05-200
(Downtown Hamilton)- Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used
or occupied unless:
i)
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer
systems are existing or have been provided for in a
binding and secured development agreement and all
regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated,
an approved waste disposal system and potable water
supply to sustain the use of land for buildings or
structures are existing or have been provided for to the
satisfaction of the Chief Building Official and all
regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-
in-lieu of parkland in accordance with the City of
Hamilton Parkland Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of
Parkland Policy has been received to the satisfaction of
the General Manager of the Planning and Economic
Development Department and/or his or her designate."
The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
.
notice of the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Plannin.q Act.
PASSED and ENACTED this day of ,2006.
MAYOR CLERK
CI-05-1



Content from 07146 to amend fireworks bylaw no 02285 and to repeal bylaw no 416694pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Emergency & Community
Services Committee
Report: 07-006
CM: May 16,2007
Bill No.146
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-146
To Amend Fireworks By-law No. 02-285 to Repeal By-law No. 4166-94, Passed by
The Corporation of the Town of Dundas, namely “A By-law to Regulate the Sale
and Use of Fireworks”
WHEREAS Council enacted By-law 02-285 (Fireworks By-law) with the intent of
repealing all previous Fireworks By-laws in existence at that time;
AND WHEREAS Section 121 of the Municipal Act, S. 0. 2001, c. 25 provides that a
municipality may regulate or prohibit the sale of fireworks;
AND WHEREAS new phrasing is required to repeal By-law No. 4166-94, passed by
The Corporation of the Town of Dundas, namely “A By-law to regulate the Sale and
Use of Fireworks”,
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Section 12.1 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 02-285 is hereby amended to
include the phrasing “12.l(e) By-law No. 4166-94, passed by The Corporation
of the Town of Dundas, namely “A By-law to Regulate the Sale and Use of
Fireworks”,
2. That this by-law comes into force and effect on the date of its passing.
PASSED and ENACTED this 16th day of May, 2007.
rlltY
- CLERK
Fred Eisenberger Kevin C. Christenson



Content from 07160 the idling control bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
THE IDLING CONTROL BY-LAW
BY-LAW NO. 07-160
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending
by-laws listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of
convenience only and is not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate
reference to the By-law, certified copies should be obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020
CITY OF HAMILTON IDLING CONTROL BY-LAW
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 07-160
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-Law No: Effective Date:
20-017 February 12, 2020 Section 2 - amend, replace or add various
definitions. Replace subsection 3.1; repeal
4.3, 4.4(b),4.4(c) and 4.6. Repeal Section 5
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report::07-014 (PD05092(a))
CM: May 16, 2007
Bill No.160
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-160
To Prohibit Unnecessary Idling of Vehicles within the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, S.O. 2001, Chapter 25,
authorize municipalities to regulate matters for purposes related to the health, safety,
and well-being of the inhabitants of the municipality;
AND WHEREAS Section 425 of the Municipal Act. S.O. 2001, Chapter 25, authorizes
municipalities to pass by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the
municipality be guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS motor vehicles are a major source of greenhouse gases, nitrogen
oxides, carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxides, volatile organic compounds and fine
particulate matter emitted into the outdoor air in the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS the levels of air pollution in the City of Hamilton are associated with
adverse health effects, including deleterious effects on respiratory and cardiovascular
health;
AND WHEREAS Section 10 of the Municipal Act, S.O. 2001, Chapter 25, provides that
municipal purposes include providing services and things considered desirable, and
fostering the current and future economic, social and environmental well-being of the
municipality;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton desires to assist in the reduction
of adverse health effects by reducing the unnecessary emissions of nitrogen oxides,
carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxides, volatile organic compounds and fine particulate
matter;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has committed to reducing greenhouse gas
emissions as part of our commitment to the Federation of Canadian Municipalities
Partners for Climate Protection Program;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020
1. Short Title:
This by-law may be cited as "The Idling Control By-law."
2. Definitions
In this By-law:
2.1 "City" means the City of Hamilton;
2.2 "Council" means the Council for the City of Hamilton;
2.3 (20-017)"Idling" means the parking or standing of a motor vehicle, while the combustion
engine is running and is not being used to operate auxiliary equipment that is essential
to the basic function of the motor vehicle;
2.4 "Motor Vehicle" includes an automobile, motorcycle, motor assisted bicycle unless
otherwise indicated under the Ontario Highway Traffic Act and any other vehicle
propelled or driven otherwise than by muscular power, but does not include a street
car, or other motor vehicles running only upon rails, or a motorized snow vehicle,
traction engine, farm tractor, self-propelled implement of husbandry or road-building
machine within the meaning of the Ontario Highway Traffic Act.
2.5 "Transit Vehicle" means public transit vehicles, tour buses, and motor coaches;
2.6 "Mobile Work Vehicle" means:
a) A vehicle containing equipment that must be operated inside or in association
with the vehicle, including waste and snow removal vehicles; or
b) A vehicle serving as a facility for taking measurements or making observations
operated by or on behalf of a municipality, public utility or police, fire or
ambulance service;
c) (20-017) a motor vehicle owned or operated by the City of Hamilton while the
operator is engaged in the performance of his or her duties;
2.7 "Stopover" means a scheduled delay of a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes at a transit
vehicle terminal to allow transit vehicles to adjust to service schedules;
2.8 "Layover" means a stopping point along a transit route for a maximum of fifteen (15)
minutes to allow transit vehicles to adjust service schedules;
2.9 (20-017) “Park” or “Parking” means the standing of a motor vehicle, whether occupied or
not, and includes when Standing temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading merchandise;
2.10 (20-017) “Stand” or “Standing”, means the halting of a Motor Vehicle, whether occupied or
not, except for the purpose of and while actually engaged in receiving or discharging
passengers.
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020
3. General Provisions
3.1 (20-017) No person shall cause or permit a motor vehicle to idle for more than three (3)
consecutive minutes on a highway (as defined in the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990,
c. H.8) under the jurisdiction of the City of Hamilton or on any other property or lands
within the City of Hamilton that is not a highway.
3.2 Article 3.1 does not apply to the following motor vehicles or situations:
a) Police, fire or emergency medical service vehicles while engaged in operational
activities, including training and patient transfer activities;
b) Vehicles assisting in an emergency activity, including tow trucks while engaged
in hooking up to or moving another vehicle;
c) Vehicles required to remain motionless because of an emergency, traffic
(including congestion and signals), weather conditions, or mechanical
difficulties over which the driver has no control;
d) Mobile work vehicles while they are in the course of being used for their basic
function;
e) During weather conditions where outside temperatures are over 27° C or below
5° C where idling may be necessary for the operation of air conditioning or
heating equipment as long as the vehicle is occupied;
f) Vehicles engaged in the course of a parade, race or any other event
authorized by Council.
g) Vehicles transporting a person where a medical doctor certifies in writing for
medical reasons that a person in a vehicle requires temperature or humidity
to be maintained within a certain range, and where the medical note is up-
to-date and is kept with the vehicle operator;
h) Transit vehicles while passengers are embarking or disembarking en route
or in terminals;
i) Transit vehicles while at a layover or stopover location except where idling
is substantially for the convenience of the operator of the vehicle or in
situations where engine shutdown will result in restart complications;
j) Vehicles where idling is required as part of the repair process or to prepare
a vehicle for service while the vehicle is in the possession or on the property
of a commercial vehicle repair facility;
k) Agricultural vehicles and equipment unlicensed under the Ontario Highway
Traffic Act. Agricultural vehicles are designed and used exclusively for
operations off the public highway in the performance of agricultural work or
animal husbandry.
I) Armoured vehicles where a person remains inside the vehicle while
guarding the contents of the vehicle or while the vehicle is being loaded or
unloaded;
m) Commercial vehicles using heating or refrigeration systems powered by the
motor or engine for the preservation of perishable cargo; or
n) A vehicle whose engine is being operated to boost the battery of another
vehicle, or which vehicle is connected to an external stationary device which
relies on the power of the vehicle to carry out work such as a tractor or
traction engine powering another such device by pulley or other connection.
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020
4. Enforcement
4.1 Any Police Officer or a Municipal By-law Enforcement Officer appointed under any
by- law of the City, for the purpose of this section is authorized to inform any
person of the provisions of this by-law and to request compliance therewith.
4.2 Any Police Officer or a Municipal By-law Enforcement Officer appointed under any
by- law of the City may enforce the provisions of this by-law.
4.3 The Court, in which a conviction has been entered, and any other court of
competent jurisdiction thereafter, may make an order prohibiting the continuation or
repetition of the offence by the person convicted and such order shall be in addition
to any other penalty imposed on the person convicted. (Repealed 20-017)
4.4 In accordance with the Municipal Act, 2001 and in particular the conditions set out
in sections 435 and 437 of the Municipal Act, 2001, including the provision of notice
to an occupier where required, a person authorized to enforce this by-law may
enter on a property at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an
inspection to determine whether or not the following are being complied with:
(a) this by-law;
(b) a direction, requirement or order made under this by-law; or (Repealed 20-017)
(c) an order made under section 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001 in respect of a
contravention of this by-law. (Repealed 20-017)
4.5 A person authorized to enforce this by-law may, for the purposes of an inspection
under section 4.4:
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection; a
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the
purpose of making copies or extracts;
(c) require information from any person concerning a matter related to the
inspection; or
(d) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert knowledge,
make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs necessary for the
purposes of the inspection.
4.6 Where required, a person authorized to enforce this by-law may carry out an
inspection or exercise the powers as provided in an order of the court as issued under
section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001. (Repealed 20-017)
5. Administrative Penalties System(20-017)
5.1 (20-017) This by-law in its entirety is designated as a by-law to which the City’s
Administrative Penalties by-law applies.
5.2 (20-017) The owner of the motor vehicle that is left idling in contravention of this by-law,
when given a penalty notice in accordance with the City’s Administrative Penalties By-
law, shall be liable to pay the City an administrative penalty in the amount specified in
Schedule A of the City’s Administrative Penalty By-law and any fees related thereto.
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020
6. Enactment
6.1 Subject to section 6.2, this by-law comes into force and effect on the date of
enactment.
6.2 Section 5 of this by-law comes into force and effect on June 1, 2008.
PASSED and ENACTED this 16th day of May, 2007.
Office Consolidation as of February, 2020



Content from 07324 to amend hamilton sign bylaw no 06243pdf:
Authority: Item, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 07-019 (PED07274)
CM: November 14,2007
Bill No. 324
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-324
To Amend By-law 06-243 as it Relates to Delegated Authority Respecting
Signs and Other Advertising Devices within the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton deems it necessary to amend By-
law No. 06-243 to update all references made to staff titles and standing
committee names in order to reflect the new organizational structure of the
Planning and Economic Development Department;
AND WHEREAS this is an administrative change that does not change the intent
or effect of the delegated approval authority;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That Section 6.3 of By-law 06-243 is amended by deleting the phrase
“Director of Development and Real Estate or his designate” and replacing it
with the phrase “Director of Planning or any successor, or his designate”.
2. That Section 6.6 of By-law 06-243 is deleted in its entirety and replaced with
the following section:
“6.6 An applicant may appeal the variance application decision of the
Director of Planning or any successor, or his designate to the
Economic Development and Planning Committee or any successor
Com mittee. ”
3. That Section 6.7 of By-law 06-243 is amended by deleting the phrase
“Planning and Economic Development Committee” and replacing it with the
phrase “Economic Development and Planning Committee or any successor
Committee”.
Delegated Authority Respecting Signs and Other Advertising Devices
Page 2 of 2
4. That Section 6.8 of By-law 06-243 is amended by deleting the phrase
“Planning and Economic Development Committee” and replacing it with the
phrase “Economic Development and Planning Committee or any successor
Committee”.
5. That the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
notice of the passing of this By-law, in accordance with the Municipal Act.
6. This By-law comes into force and effect on the day it is passed and enacted.
PASSED and ENACTED this 14thd ay of November, 2007.
s
evin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk
C I-07-N



Content from 07357 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 07-036 (FCS07098/PWO7145)
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 357
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-357
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2008
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 07- 036 and
did authorize the 2008 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2008 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate to give reasonable notice.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. Schedule “B” to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “B” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
3. This by-law shall come into force as of January 1, 2008.
2
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 12th day of December, 2007.
F rg d Ei se nb e rge r
Mayor City Clerk
3
SCHEDULE “A”
Sa ni tar v S ur c ha rqe
The Sanitary Surcharge is calculated as 100% of the gross amount of the
monthly or bi-monthly metered water or non-metered water rate, plus applicable
taxes.
4
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
Initial Application Processing Fee $10 8.83 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
Supplementary Application Fee $326.31 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
Annual Administration Fee (where $435.13 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = Annual Volume (m3) of Water supplied to the Property from all
sources
B = Annual Wastewater Diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Applicant is
not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A, insert a
value equal to 75% of A)
C = Annual Wastewater Discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = Infiltration and Inflow Add Back (D = C x 133%: add back
adjustment of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers
continue to pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated
with inflow and infiltration)
E% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (before phase in)
F% = Wastewater Abatement in Percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% =/A - D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
5
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
G = Actual Volume (m3)o f Water Supplied to the Property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = Volume (m3) of Water eligible for the Abatement during the
previous quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2003 is $0.669 per cubic meter of water; for
2004 is $0.733 per cubic meter of water; for 2005 is $0.792 per
cubic meter of water; for 2006 is $0.851 per cubic meter of water;
for 2007 is $0.913 per cubic meter of water; for 2008 is $0.994 per
cubic meter of water)
$J = Dollar Amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: G x F% = H
Step 6: HxI=$J



Content from 07358 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 07-036 (FCS07098/PWO7145)
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 358
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-358
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law 04-150, as amended,
and Implement the 2008 Sewer Use Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law 04-1 50, known and referred to as the “Sewer Use By-law”, which
By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 07- 036 and
did authorize the 2008 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
sewer use fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2008 sewer use fees and charges set out herein
has been given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council
considers adequate to give reasonable notice.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “D” to By-law No. 04-150, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “D” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. This by-law shall come into force as of January 1, 2008.
2
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law 04-150, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 12th day of December, 2007
Mayor City Clerk
*GST to be added to fees
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY ls2T00,8
1. Annual permit to discharge hauled sewage $257.69*
2. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
discharge: discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant compliant
up to 1000 imperial up to 4.54 m3 or
gallons or any part any part thereof $ 38.78* $38.78*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 38.78* $77.56*
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 77.56" $11 6.34*
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3b ut less than $1 16.34* $19 3.89*
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3 ~
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $155.12" $232.67*
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10000 imperial m3
aallons
*GST to be added to fees
(b) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated outside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for all discharges
from outside the City:
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant and non-
comdiant
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 m'or any part
gallons or any part thereof $77.56*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 15.9 $155.12*
less than or equal to m3
3500 imperial gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 22.7 $232.6 7*
less than or equal to m3
5000 imperial gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to 36.3 $387.79*
less than or equal to m3
8000 imperial gallohs
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3 m3 but
imperial gallons but less than or equal to $465.45*
less than or equal to 45.43 m3
10000 imperial gallons
c) Holding Tanks of Recreational Vehicles $ 5.10*
3. Overstrength Discharge Fees
Parameter Fee (centdkg)
B.O.D. $0.61 86*
Suspended Solids $0.4949*
Phenolic Compounds $0.61 86*
Solvent Extractable Matter $0.519 6*
Kjeldahl Nitrogen $1.8837*
Phosphorus $1.3252*
*GST to be added to fees
5
4. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $254.13*
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $254.1 3*
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $254.1 3*
5. Spills Response Fee (per hour) $ 54.95*
6. Information Request Fee $1 16.91*
*GST to be added to fees



Content from 07359 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 07-036 (FCS07098/PWO7145)
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 359
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-359
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2008 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on February 15, 2006, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 06-026, which by-law came into force and effect on
March 1, 2006 and may be known and referred to as “The Sewer and Drain By-
law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 07- 036 and
did authorize the 2008 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2008 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate to give reasonable notice.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection lO(3) of By-law No. 06-026, as amended, is amended by
deleting the words “section 12” in the seventh line of the subsection and
by substituting therefor the words “section 6”.
2
2. Subsection lO(5) of By-law No. 06-026, as amended, is amended by
deleting the words “section 12” in the third to last line of the subsection
and by substituting therefor the words “section 6”.
3. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 06-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
4. This by-law shall come into force as of January 1, 2008.
5. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 06-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 12thd ay of December, 2007
x
- evin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk
3
SCHEDULE “A”
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
Effective January 1,2008
1. Basic Fee for any sewer permit $54.40
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1 ) of this Schedule “A”, the following
fees are payable:
for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public portion, or for
either one individually $22.90
for a Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $22.90
for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $22.90
for a Catchbasin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $22.90
inspect Storm Sewer $22.90
inspect Sanitary Sewer $22.90
2. Discharge of Special Service Agreements $228.50
3. Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $228.50
4. Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $34.20
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
5. Service Charge for Missed Appointments $10 2.00
and Inspections Not Ready and
completed follow-up inspection ($50.00/visit).
4
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Regular Hours $345.80 plus GST
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning -After Hours $460.51 plus GST
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate $412.30 plus GST
Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $568.58 plus GST
Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $694.93 plus GST
Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation- Regular Hours $515 .38 plus GST
Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation -After Hours $641.73 plus GST
Notes to Schedule “A”:
1. Unless stated otherwise, all fees and charges are GST exempt.
2. “Regular Hours” means 7 a.m. - 5 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
3. “After Hours” means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday,
Sunday, public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized
or required by law to be closed.
4. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning” means services to relieve blockage(s) in the
Sewer Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer service.
5. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate” means services to locate any
Defects in the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television inspection.
6. ‘Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services to complete a
thorough cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer Lateral.
7. “Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services related to an
unsuccessful attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.



Content from 07360 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report; 07-036 (FCS07098/PWO7145)
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 360
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 07-360
To Amend the Waterworks Bylaw R84-026, as amended,
And Implement the 2008 Water Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by-
law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 1 of Committee of the Whole Report 07- 036 and
did authorize the 2008 water and wastewater fees and charges, including but not
limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
2
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2008 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in a form and in the manner and at the times that the Council considers
adequate to give reasonable notice.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. Schedule “C” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “C” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
3. Schedule “E” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “El’ attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
4. Schedule “G” to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule “G” attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
5. This by-law shall come into force as of the 1’‘ day of January, 2008.
6. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 12th day of December, 2007.
evin C. Christenson
City Clerk
3
SCHEDULE “A”
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2008
Water: City of Hamilton
$362.79 per annum
Note: Sanitary Surcharge is 100% of non-metered water rate for a
combined total non-metered annual water and wastewater rate of
$725.57 per annum.
4
SCHEDULE "C"
MISCELLANEOUS RATES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2008
(Referred to in Section 12(6), (7) and (8))
1. Travelling Shows and Other Temporaw Occasions
The deposit required from travelling shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Thousand, Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($5,355.00), and
consists of:
(a) Two Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($255.00) as a usage deposit (to be
applied to the cost of temporary connection/disconnection, the per
diem rental cost for the hydrant adapter and the amount due for water
used); and
(b) Five Thousand, One Hundred Dollars ($5,100.00) as a damage
deposit (refundable upon return to the City of the hydrant adapter,
less any damages incurred).
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 12 of Schedule "E" to this By-
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
2. Public Water Filling Stations
(a) The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water
Filling Stations be $1.492 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public
Water Filling Stations are located at:
(i) Cormorant Road, Ancaster
(ii) Dartnall Road, Hamilton.
(b) Water Haulage License Fee $17 3.40
3. Private Water Fillinq Stations
The one time permit fee for new private water filling stations approved by the
General Manager of Public Works is $1,020.00 and is payable upon permit
application.
5
The annual permit fee for both existing private water filling stations and new
private water filling stations approved by the General Manager of Public
Works is $306.00 and is payable within one month of the notification by the
City.
4. Areas Outside the Citv of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G" to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
6
SCHEDULE "E"
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2008
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $73.40
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in Section 4(l)(b) of By-law R84-026,
as amended:
Size of Water Meter Fee
16 mm diameter $ 326.40
20 mm diameter $ 367.20
11 I
25 mm diameter $ 596.70
38 mm diameter $ 892.50
50 mm diameter $ 1,071.00
11 1
50 mm diameter (turbine with strainer) $ 1,363.00
50 mm diameter (compound with strainer) $ 2,733.00
100 mm diameter (turbine with strainer $ 2,580.60
11 I
100 mm diameter (compound with strainer) $ 4,426.80
100 mm diameter (fire service compound) $ 4,500.00
150 mm diameter (turbine with strainer) $ 4,452.30
150 mm diameter (compound with strainer) $ 8,746.50
150 mm diameter (fire service turbine) $ 4,946.00
150 mm diameter (fire service compound) $ 9,500.00
200 mm diameter (turbine with strainer) $ 6,410.70
200 mm diameter (fire service turbine) $ 8,597.00
11 I
200 mm diameter (fire service compound) $13,000.00
11 I
250 mm diameter (fire service compound) $18,124.00
Other sizes and types Cost+ 33%
Overhead
7
2. Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 33% Overhead
3. For superintending the laying of a new water service
(a) Regular Inspection - Regular Hours $63.20
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $63.20
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
(c) Regular Inspection - After Hours $94.90
4. Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee (not including new water
meter, if required):**
(a) Service replacement of public portion from Omm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $270.30
(b) Inspection of service replacement of private portion from
Omm to and including 20mm $204.00
5. For turning water off $63.20
6. For turning water on $63.20
7. For turning water on & off during the same call $94.90
8. For each Special Water Service to be connected as
referred to in Section 4(18) of this By-law $2,365 .OO
9. Discharge of Special Water Service Agreements $341.70
10. Processing of Special Water Service Agreements $515.10
11. Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes (hydrant flow test) $91.80
12. For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):***
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnectionf ee
(a) Connection/Disconnection Fee - Regular Hours $17 8.50/visit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee - After Hours $270.30/visit
(c) Additional per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental $10 .20/day
8
13. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter:
Size of Meter cost****
16 mm diameter $ 116.50
20 mm diameter $ 172.20
25 mm diameter $ 213.50
38 mm diameter $ 476.20
50 mm diameter $ 635.50
50 mm diameter (turbine) $1,441 .OO
50 mm diameter (compound) $3,372 .OO
100 mm diameter (turbine) $ 1,973.80
100 mm diameter (compound) $3,568.60
100 mm diameter (fire service $7,500.00
compound)
150 mm diameter (turbine) $3,631.70
150 mm diameter (compound) $7,400.80
150 mm diameter (fire service 7,771 .OO
turbine)
150 mm diameter (fire service $1 2,000.40
com poun d)
200 mm diameter (turbine) $ 5,368.60
200 mm diameter (fire service $1 0,490.00
turbine)
200 mm diameter (fire service $16,500.50
com poun d )
250 mm diameter (fire service $23,312.00
compound)
>250 mm diameter (all types) cost + 33%
overhead
9
14. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
I I
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $ 96.90
11 I II
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $147.90
~~
100 mm plus diameter $336.60
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) cost +33%
overhead
15. For service calls other than previously specified:
(a) Service Call - Regular Hours $63.20
(b) Service Call - After Hours $96.90
16. Meter Open By-pass $336.60
17. Repair or Replace City Property Cost PIUS 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
18. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge
19. General Administration Fees
Extra or lost card replacement for water filling stations $40.80
Account Review $89.80
General Request (per hour) $45.90
NSF Cheque $28.00
Permit Cancellation Administration Fee $25.00
Permit Renewal Fee $35.00
Notes to Schedule “E”:
*
A service charge applies for each refund issued.
**
Additional fees will apply for service size upgrades based on size and length
***
This service requires a $5,355.00 deposit ($255.00 usage deposit and
$5,100.00 damage deposit)
****
Plus PST and GST
“Regular Hours’’ means 7 a.m. - 3 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
“After Hours” means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday, Sunday,
public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized or required by
law to be closed.
10
SCHEDULE "G"
TABLE OF METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2008
(Referred to in Section 12(2), (3) & (4) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Charqe
The minimum charge per billing period for the use of the specified volume of
water is as follows:
Minimum
Residential Approved Volume/ Approved Minimum
Me t e r S ize Bi-Monthly Rate Bi-Monthlv Monthlv Rate Volume/Month
15 mm to 20
mm $14 .26 10 m3 $7.13 5 m3
16 mm $14 .26 10 m3 $7.13 5 m3
20 mm $14 .26 10 m3 $7.13 5 m3
25 mm $75.42 30 m3 $37.71 15 m3
38 mm $83.78 30 m3 $41.89 15 m3
50 mm $99.64 30 m3 $49.82 15 m3
75 mm $1 72.62 30 m3 $86.31 15 m3
100 mm $221 .I2 30 m3 $1 10.56 15 m3
150 mm $391.26 30 m3 $1 95.63 15 m3
200 mm $675.58 30 m3 $337.79 15 m3
250 mm $1,040.04 30 m3 $520.02 15 m3
100 mm $331.66 30 m3 $1 65.83 15 m3
150 mm $586.90 30 m3 $293.45 15 m3
200 mm $1,013.34 30 m3 $506.67 15 m3
11
B) Consumption Charge
The consumption charge for the amount of water used over and above the
minimum volume per bi-monthly billing is as follows:
Minimum
Consumption Charge Per
Bi-Monthly
Cubic Metre
Volume
Residential 10 m3 $0.994 > 10 m3
10 m3
Small Commercial $0.994 > 10 m3
Commercial / Industrial 30 m3 $0.994> 30m3
Haldimand & Water Haulers 30 m3 $1.492 > 30 m3
C) SANITARY SURCHARGE IS 100% OF WATER CONSUMPTION (applies
to all metered residential, commercial, industrial and institutional water
consumption).



Content from 08065 to amend municipal parks bylaw no 01219pdf:
Authority: Item 5, Public Works Committee
Report 08-004 (PW08021)
CM: February 27, 2008
Bill No. 065
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-065
To Amend By-law No. 01-219 to provide for operation of Segway Personal
Transporters in Municipal Parks
WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25,
authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws as necessary or desirable for the public
and municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 4 through 7 of subsection lO(2)
authorize by-laws respecting: assets of the municipality, the economic, social and
environmental well-being of the municipality; health, safety and well-being of persons;
the provision of any service or thing that it considers necessary or desirable for the
public;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton, on the 27'h day of April, 2004, did pass
and enact City of Hamilton By-law No. 01-219 to Manage and Regulate Municipal Parks;
AND WHEREAS Council desires to amend By-law No. 01-219 to provide for limited use of
Segway Personal Transporters within parks, specifically in parking lots, sidewalks within parks,
on paths and multiuse trails
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
I . City of Hamilton By-law No. 01- 219 , as amended, is hereby further amended
by repealing and replacing clause I( s) with the following:
"1. (s) "persons with disabilities" and "disabled person" includes any person
who is blind, or a person who has any degree of physical disability, which
requires the physical reliance upon a wheelchair, crutches, braces, canes, or
other similar remedial appliance or device, or who are authorized users of
Segway Personal Transporters, or requires the reliance upon an animal trained
to provide guidance or other form of assistance;
2. City of Hamilton Bylaw No. 01-219 as amended is hereby further amended by
repealing subsection 30(2) and replacing it with the following subsections:
To Amend By-Law No. 01-219
Being a By-law to Manage and Regulate Municipal Parks
"30. (2) Unless authorized by permit, and except where provided in this section
and section 34 with respect to bicycles, no person shall while in any park,
drive, operate, pull or ride any vehicle except on a roadway or public
parking area, provided however this section shall not apply with respect
to persons with disabilities and disabled persons or other authorized
users of Segway Personal Transporters who are operating the Segway
device in a public parking area, or on a sidewalk, path or multiuse trail
within a park.
30.( 3) For the purposes of this section, "authorized users of Segway Personal
Transporters" means a member of the Hamilton Police Service for the
purpose of law enforcement, or a person who is 14 years old or older
whose mobility is limited by one or more disabilities, conditions or
functional impairments who operates the Segway in compliance with
Ontario Regulation 488106.
30(4) For the purposes of this section a Segway Personal Transporter is a
device manufactured by Segway Inc. and called a Segway Personal
Transporter or a Segway Human Transporter, which device has not been
modified after its manufacture other than by the addition of a basket,
bag, bell, horn or lamp or other accessory customarily attached to a
bicycle, and which addition does not increase the speed capability of the
device.
"
2. Subject to the amendments made in this By-Law, in all other aspects, By-Law
No. 01-219, including all Schedules thereto, as amended, is hereby confirmed
unchanged.
3. This By-law shall come into force and take affect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 26" day of March, 2008
Fred Eisenberger /kevin Christensen
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08086 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272 as amendedpdf:
Authority: ltem 9, Audit and Administration
Committee Report; 07- 012
CM: October 24,2007
ltem 11, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-015
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 086
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-086
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law 03-272, as amended.
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary Surcharge
and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS on the 24th day of October, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 9 of Audit and Administration Committee Report 07-
012 and did thereby approve the revised Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy
and the amendment of The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-
law, as amended, to reflect the City's current wastewater account collection
practices;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 11 of Audit and Administration Committee Report
07- 015 and did thereby approve the Water Leak Adjustment Policy and the
amendment of The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law, as
amended, to implement such policy
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section (d. I) immediately after sub-section
I( d):
(d.1) "City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy" means the
policy approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting
of October 24, 2007 as ltem 9(a) of Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-012, as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found
at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
2. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section (d.2) immediately after sub-section
l(d.1):
(d.2) "City of Hamilton Water Leak Adjustment Policy1'm eans the policy
approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting of
December 12, 2007 as Item Il (a) of Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-015 , as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found
at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
3. Section 5 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section 5(d) immediately after sub-section
5(c):
(d) The owner or occupant of lands who are connected to the sanitary
sewage systems of the City shall immediately report to the City of
Hamilton any leaks that develop at the water meter or its couplings.
Where a leak has developed, the City of Hamilton Water Leak
Adjustment Policy may apply to provide adjustments to any
Sanitary Surcharge paid or payable in the circumstances specified
in the policy.
4. Section 7 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
following new section 7 substituted:
7. The City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy will
apply to the collection of unpaid fees and charges consisting of the
Sanitary Surcharge.
5. Section 8 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
following new section 8 substituted:
8. Where an account for the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered or
non-metered water rates remains unpaid, the following provisions
apply:
(a) The unpaid Sanitary Surcharge imposed by this By-law on a
person is a debt due to the City of Hamilton and the City of
Hamilton may take such action as it considers necessary
and as permitted by law to collect the debt.
(b) Such unpaid amount may be added to the tax roll for the
property to which the City's sewage system is connected,
and collected in the same manner as municipal taxes.
(c) Without limiting the provisions of sub-sections 8(a) and (b)
above, the City of Hamilton may shut off the supply of water
to a property if the fees or charges payable by the owners or
occupants of the property in respect of the Sanitary
Surcharge are overdue. The fees for turning off the water
and turning on the water, as set out in Schedule "Ent o the
Waterworks By-law, must also be paid to the City before the
water will be turned on again.
6. Sections I,4 and 5 of this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force
as of the 24th day of October, 2007.
7. Sections 2 and 3 of this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force
as of the 12'~d ay of December, 2007.
8. In all other respects, the. contents of By-law 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED and ENACTED this 23rdd ay of April, 2008.
in C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08087 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: ltem 9, Audit and Administration
Committee Report; 07- 012
CM: October 24,2007
ltem 11, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-015
CM: December 12,2007
Bill No. 087
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-087
To Amend The City of Hamilton Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended.
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by-
law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS on the 24th day of October, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 9 of Audit and Administration Committee Report 07-
012 and did thereby approve the revised Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy
and the amendment of By-law R84-026, as amended, to reflect the City's current
water account collection practices;
AND WHEREAS on the 12th day of December, 2007, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 11 of Audit and Administration Committee Report
07- 015 and did thereby approve the Water Leak Adjustment Policy and the
amendment of By-law R84-026, as amended, to implement such policy.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law R84-026, as amended, is further amended by adding
the following new sub-section (c.1) immediately after sub-section I( c):
(c.1) "City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy" means the
policy approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting
of October 24, 2007 as ltem 9(a) of Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-012, as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found
at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
2. Section 1 of By-law R84-026, as amended, is further amended by adding
the following new sub-section (c.2) immediately after sub-section I( c.1):
(c.2) "City of Hamilton Water Leak Adjustment Policy" means the policy
approved by the Council of the City of Hamilton at its meeting of
December 12, 2007 as ltem Il (a) of Audit and Administration
Committee Report 07-015, as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found
at the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
3. Section 12 of By-law R84-026, as amended, is further amended by adding
the following new sub-section (13 ):
(13) The Owner or Occupant of the lands to which water is supplied by
the City of Hamilton shall immediately report to the City of Hamilton
any leaks that develop at the water meter or its couplings. Where a
leak has developed, the City of Hamilton Water Leak Adjustment
Policy may apply to provide adjustments to fees and charges paid
or payable for metered and non-metered rate accounts in the
circumstances specified in the policy.
4. Sub-sections 13(4), (5),( 6) and (7) of By-law R84-026, as amended, are
repealed and the following new sub-sections (4), (5), (6), (7) and (8)
substituted:
Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy
(4) The City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy will
apply to the collection of fees and charges for unpaid metered and
non-metered rate accounts.
When Meter Does Not Record Properly or Cannot Be Read
(5) In the event of a water meter failing to record properly, or where the
meter-reader is unable to obtain a reading, the person or persons
liable to pay the meter rates are liable to pay the same for an
amount of water estimated on the basis of a corresponding period
in the immediately previous year, or, where the water user did not
occupy the same premises for the same period during the
corresponding period in the previous year, then on the basis of a
similar period in the current year, or where that is not applicable
then the water user is liable for the applicable minimum charge set
forth in Schedule "G" to this By-law.
Debt
(6) All fees and charges for unpaid metered and non-metered rate
accounts imposed by this By-law on a person are a debt due to the
City of Hamilton and the City of Hamilton may take such action as it
considers necessary and as permitted by law to collect the debt.
Collected in Same Manner as Municipal Taxes
(7) Where all or part of a fee or charge for a metered or non-metered
rate account imposed by this By-law for the supply of water remains
unpaid, such amount may be added to the tax roll for the property
to which the water was supplied, and collected in the same manner
as municipal taxes.
Shutting Off Water
(8) Without limiting the provisions of sub-sections 13(6) and (7) above,
the City of Hamilton may shut off the supply of water to a property if
the fees or charges payable by the Owners or Occupants of the
property for the supply of the water to the property are overdue.
The fees for turning off the water and turning on the water, as set
out in Schedule "E" to this By-law, must also be paid to the City
before the water will be turned on again.
5. Sections 1 and 4 of this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force
as of the 24th day of October, 2007.
6. Sections 2 and 3 of this by-law shall be deemed to have come into force
as of the 12'~d ay of December, 2007.
7. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
d ENACTED this 23rdd ay of April, 2008.
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08099 to amend bylaw no 07170 to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 20, Economic Development
and Planning Committee Whole
Report; 08-003
CM: February 13,2008
Bill No. 099
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-099
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-17 0;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to By-law 07-170 as
hereinafter set out;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Paragraph 64.(1)(0) of Schedule 25 is deleted and replaced with the following
new paragraph:
64.(1)(0) equip each licensed taxicab with: a Global Positioning System
within five years of May 28, 2003; an on-board camera on or
before November 29, 2008; and such other safety alternatives as
may be prescribed from time to time by the Issuer of Licences.
2. This By-law comes into force on the date it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 23rdd ay of April, 2008.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08131 to amend bylaw no 07170 to licence and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 13, Planning and Economic
Development Committee Report
(PED08117)
CM: May 28, 2008
Bil No. 131
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-131
To Amend By-law No. 07-170,
a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for housekeeping and technical amendments to
By-law 07-170 as hereinafter set out;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. By-law 07-170 is amended in accordance with sections 2 to 99 inclusive and
these sections are deemed to include all necessary amendments to grammar
including punctuation.
2. The title "GENERAL PROVISIONS" is added after the recitals.
3. Paragraph 1 (1 )(i) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the word
"appointed" and replacing it with "assigned" and by deleting the words
"Buildings and Licensing" and replacing them with "Parking and By-law
Services" .
4. Paragraph 1 (1)0) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the words
"Building and Licensing" and replacing them with "Parking and By-law
Services" .
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 2 of 21
5. Paragraph 1(1)(m) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the words
"of this By-law".
6. Paragraph 1 (1 )(p) of the General Provisions is amended by replacing the word
"Section" with "section".
7. Subsection 2(a) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the words
"Building and Licensing" and replacing them with "Parking and By-law
Services" .
8. Subsection 2(b) of the General Provisions is deleted and replaced by the
following new subsection:
2(b) Enforcement of this By-law shall be by:
persons assigned by the Issuer of Licences or Council for the
(i)
purpose of enforcing the provisions of this By-law which shall
include the following:
law enforcement officers; and
a. municipal
b. inspectors appointed pursuant to the Buildinq Code Act. 1992,
S.O. 1992, c. 23; and
police officers.
(ii)
9. Subsection 3(3) of the General Provisions is amended by adding the word
"subsection" before "(2)" and by deleting the letter "s" at the end of "Procedure".
10. Subsection 4(1) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting paragraph
(c) and replacing it with the following new paragraph:
(c) where a limited number of licences may be issued or transferred,
that there is a licence approved or available for issuance or
transfer.
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 3 of 21
11. Subsection 4(2) of the General Provisions is amended by adding the word
"paragraphs" before "(1 )(a) or (b)", the words "or transferred" after "to be
issued" and the word "paragraph" before "(1 )(c)".
12. Subsection 4(3) of the General Provisions is amended by adding the word
"subsection" before "(2)".
13. Paragraph 6(1 )(e) of the General Provisions is amended by relettering
subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(iii) as (ii), subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(iv) as (iii) and
subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(v) as (iv).
14. Subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(i) of the General Provisions is repealed and replaced by
the following new subparagraph:
an applicant for a licence under
(i)
Schedule 1 Adult Entertainment Parlours
Schedule 2 Auctioneers
Bed and
Schedule 3 Breakfast
Establishments
Schedule 4 Body Rub Parlours
Schedule 6 Flea Markets and Antique
Markets
Schedule 9 Lodging Houses
Schedule 11 Pawnbrokers
Schedule 12 Pedlars
Schedule 14 Precious Metal and Jewellery
Dealers
Schedule 15 Public Baths
Schedule 16 Public Garages - Classes A,
B1, B2 and B3 only
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 4 of 21
Schedule 20 Residential Care Facilties
Schedule 22 Salvage and Second-Hand
Goods Businesses
Schedule 25 Taxicabs - Cab Broker only
Schedule 29 Trades
Schedule 30 Transient Traders
shall submit, as part of their application for a licence:
a. the applicant's original criminal record, provided that if no
original criminal record exists, the applicant shall submit
instead original certification from the police that no such
record exists; and
b. a list of any criminal or provincial offences in all
jurisdictions for which the applicant has been convicted and
not pardoned and which do not appear on any original
criminal record submitted.
15. Subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(iii) of the General Provisions, relettered as subparagraph
6( 1 )( e )(ii) under section 13, is repealed and replaced by the following new
subparagraph:
an applicant for a licence under
(ii)
Schedule 8 Limousines
Schedule 25 Taxicabs - Taxicab Driver and
Taxicab Owner only
shall submit, as part of their application for a licence:
a. the applicant's original criminal and driving records
provided that if no original criminal record exists, the
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 5 of 21
applicant shall submit instead original certification from the
police that no such record exists; and
b. a list of any criminal, provincial or driving offences in all
jurisdictions for which the applicant has been convicted and
not pardoned and which do not appear on any original
criminal or driving record submitted.
16. Subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(iv) of the General Provisions, relettered as subparagraph
6( 1 )( e )(iii) under section 13, is repealed and replaced by the following new
subparagraph:
a licensee under
(iii)
Schedule 8 Limousines
Schedule 25 Taxicabs - Taxicab Driver and
Taxicab Owner only
shall submit, as part of their application to renew a licence:
a. the applicant's original driving record; and
b. a list of any driving offences in all jurisdictions for which the
applicant has been convicted and not pardoned and which
do not appear on any original driving record submitted.
17. Subparagraph 6( 1 )( e )(v) of the General Provisions, relettered under section 13
as subparagraph 6(1 )(e)(iv), is amended by adding the word "subparagraph"
before each occurrence "(i) or (ii)".
18. Subsection 6(3) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the word
"paragraphs" and replacing it with "subparagraphs".
19. Subsection 6(4) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the word
"paragraph" and replacing it with "subparagraphs".
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 6 of 21
20. Subsection 6(5) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the lettering
"(i), (ii) and (iii)" and replacing it with "(i) or (ii)", by adding the word
"subparagraphs" before "1(e) (i) or (ii)" and by replacing the number "31" with
"36".
21. Subsection 7(3) of the General Provisions is deleted.
22. Subsection 8(2) of the General Provisions is amended by the deleting the
number "(3)" and replacing it with "(4)".
23. Section 8 of the General Provisions is amended by adding the following new
subsection after subsection (2) and renumbering the subsequent subsections
accordingly:
(3) Where a licence is renewed, before, on or after its date of expiry, the
date of issuance as shown on the renewed licence shall be the date of
expiry of the expired licence.
24. Subsection 8(4) of the General Provisions, renumber as subsection 8(5) under
section 23 is amended by deleting paragraphs (b) and (c) and replacing them
with the following new paragraphs:
(b) where the licence is issued to an individual, on the date of death of
the individual, provided that a taxicab owner's licence issued under
Schedule 25 shall expire in accordance with section 47 of that
Schedule;
(c) where the licence is issued to a partnership or corporation, on the
date of dissolution of the partnership or corporation;
where any federal, provincial or municipal licence, including a
(d)
permit, an approval, a registration or any other type of permission,
required for the licensee to carry on or engage in their business has
been revoked, suspended or has expired without renewal; or
where the licensee has been prohibited from carrying on or
(e)
engaging in their business under federal, provincial or municipal
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 7 of 21
authority including under authority of a court order.
25. Subsection 8(5) of the General Provisions, renumbered as subsection 8(6) under
section 23, is amended by deleting the words "licence fees paid under
subsections (2) and (3)" and replace by "paid licence fees".
26. Paragraphs 8(5)(b) and 8(5)(c) of the General Provisions, renumbered as
paragraphs 8(6)(b) and 8(6)(c) under section 23, are amended by deleting the
word "clause" and replacing it with "paragraph".
27. Section 8 of the General Provisions is amended by deleting subsection (6),
renumbered as subsection (7) under section 23, and replacing it with the
following new subsection:
(7) The licensee, or the licensee's legal representative where the licensee has
died, shall return the licence certificate, plate, sticker or photo identification
to the Issuer of Licences:
(a) where a licence that has expired under paragraph (4)(a), unless the
licence certificate has been returned to the City at the earlier
request of the Issuer of Licences, within seven days of the date of
approval of the suspension or revocation by Council;
(b) where a licence that has expired without renewal under subsection
(2) or expired under paragraphs (4)(b), (c), (d) or (e), within seven
days of the date of the expiry; or
(c) where the business licensed under this By-law ceases to operate,
within seven days of the date it ceases to operate.
28. Subsection 12( 1) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the number
"11 (2)" and replacing it with "12(2)" and by adding the following new paragraphs
after paragraph (b) and relettering the subsequent paragraphs accordingly:
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 8 of 21
(c) refuse to issue the licence where, in the opinion of the Issuer of
Licences, the business would put public safety at risk;
refuse to issue the licence where, in the opinion of the Issuer of
(d)
Licences, the business is not or wil not be carried on in compliance
with the law or the conduct of the person, in the case of a
partnership, the conduct of its partners, employees or agents or in
the case of a corporation, the conduct of its offcers, directors,
employees or agents affords reasonable grounds for belief that the
person wil not carry on or engage in this business in accordance
with the law or with honesty or integrity;
refuse to issue the licence where any federal, provincial or
(e)
municipal licence, including a permit, an approval, a registration or
any other type of permission, required for the applicant to carry on
or engage in their business has been revoked, suspended or has
expired without renewal;
refuse to issue the licence where the applicant has been prohibited
(f)
from carrying on or engaging in their business under federal,
provincial or municipal authority including under authority -of a court
order;
29. Paragraph 12( 1 )( a) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the words
"or where approval of the licence under the policy would put public safety at risk".
30. Paragraph 12(1 )(b) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the words
"the applicable fees have not been paid" and replacing them with "any fees to be
paid in respect of the licence or the licensed premises under this By-law, By-law
06-234 or the City's User Fees and Charges By-law have not been paid" and by
deleting the word "or" after "applicant or licensee;".
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 9 of 21
31. Paragraph 12( 1 )( c) of the General Provisions, relettered under section 28 as
paragraph 12(1)(g), is amended by deleting the words "(a), or (b)" and replacing
them with "(a), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (f) ".
32. Paragraph 12(1)(d) of the General Provisions, relettered under section 28 as
paragraph 12(1)(h), is amended by deleting the words "(a), (b), or (c)" and
replace them with "(a), (b), (c), (d), (e), (f) or (g)".
33. Subsection 13(4) of the General Provisions is amended by adding the words
"subject to a decision of the Licensing Committee to extend the time for
commencing a hearing" after "notice under subsection (2)".
34. Subsection 14(1) of the General Provisions is amended by adding the following
new paragraphs after paragraph (e) and relettering the subsequent paragraph
accordingly:
that, in the opinion of the Issuer of Licences, the business would
(f)
put public safety at risk;
(g) that, in the opinion of the Issuer of Licences, the business is not or
wil not be carried on in compliance with the law or the conduct of
the person, in the case of a partnership, the conduct of its partners,
employees or agents or in the case of a corporation, the conduct of
its offcers, directors, employees or agents affords reasonable
grounds for belief that the person wil not carry on or engage in this
business in accordance with the law or with honesty or integrity;
35. Section 15 of the General Provisions is amended by numbering the first
sentence as subsection (1) and by adding the following new subsection (2):
(2) The Issuer of Licences may, at a hearing, recommend that a
licence be refused, suspended or revoked or the imposition of
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 10 of 21
conditions.
36. Subsection 16(3) of the General Provisions is amended by adding the following
new paragraph after paragraph (c) and by relettering the subsequent paragraph
accordingly:
(d) where the business would put public safety at risk;
37. Paragraph 16(3)(c), relettered as paragraph 16(3)(d) under section 36, is
amended by adding the words "in the case of a partnership, the conduct of its
partners, employees or agents", after "whether the conduct of the person," and
before "or in the case of a corporation".
38. Subsection 16(5) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the words
"final decision" and replacing them with "final recommendation".
39. Section 17(1) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting everyhing
following the words "subsection 16(3)".
40. Section 18 of the General Provisions is amended by deleting subsection (5).
41. Section 25 of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the word "clauses"
and replacing it with "subparagraphs" .
42. Section 26 of the General Provisions is deleted and replaced by the following
new section:
26.(1) Every person engaging in or carrying on any business for which a
licence is required by the provisions of this By-law shall be
responsible that all applicable law, including all the provisions of
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 11 of 21
this By-law and the applicable Schedule or Schedules regulating
such business, are complied with.
(2) Licensees shall comply with all applicable law, including all the
provisions of this By-law and the applicable Schedule or Schedules,
and with conditions of their licences, and no licensee shall cause or
permit their employee, agent or other persons carrying on or
engaging in the business on their behalf, to fail to comply with all
applicable law, including the provisions of this By-law and the
applicable Schedule or Schedules, and with the conditions of their
licences.
(3) Compliance with all applicable law, including the provisions of this
By-law and its Schedules, and with the conditions of licences is a
condition of an applicant or licensee obtaining, continuing to hold or
renewing a licence.
43. Subsection 27(2) of the General Provisions is amended by deleting the word
"concers" and replacing with "concurs".
44. Sections 31 and 32 of the General Provisions are amended by deleting each
occurrence of the word "Of' and replacing it with "of'.
45. Appendix "A" of the General Provisions, entitled "New Approvals", is amended by
having the first three title rows appear on each page.
46. Appendix "B" of the General Provisions, entitled "Renewal Approvals", is
amended by have the first four title rows appear on each page.
47. Appendix "C" of the General Provisions, entitled "Departmental Policy Standard
Character and Driving Record Criteria For Conditional Issuance and Refusal of
Mobile Licence Applications or Renewals", is amended by deleting each
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 12 of 21
occurrence of the words "Criminal Code" and replacing them with "criminal",
and by deleting the words "Building and Licensing" and replacing them with
"Parking and By-law Services.
48. Appendix "C" of the General Provisions is further amended by deleting the list
starting with "Auctioneer" and ending with "Transient Trader" and adding a new
row at to the top of the Table containing the following:
Schedules 2 (Auctioneers), 8 (Limousines), 12 (Pedlars), 25 (Taxicabs-
Taxicab Driver and Taxicab Owner only) and 30 (Transient Traders)
49. Appendix "D" of the General Provisions, entitled "Departmental Policy Standard
Character and Driving Record Criteria For Conditional Issuance and Refusal of
Establishment and Trade Licence Applications or Renewals", is amended by
deleting each occurrence of the words "Criminal Code" and replacing them with
"criminal" and by deleting the words "Building and Licensing" and replacing
them with "Parking and By-law Services".
50. Appendix "D" of the General Provisions is further amended by deleting the list
starting with "Adult Entertainment Parlour - Owner" and ending with "Master
Warm Air Heating, Air Conditioning & Ventilation Installer" and adding a new
row at to the top of the Table containing the following:
Schedules 1 (Adult Entertainment Parlours), 3 (Bed and Breakfast
Establishments),4 (Body Rub Parlours), 6 (Flea Markets and Antique
Markets), 9 (Lodging Houses), 11 (Pawnbrokers), 14 (Precious Metal and
Jewellery Dealers), 15 (Public Baths), 16 (Public Garages - Classes A, B1, B2
and B3 only), 20 (Residential Care Facilties), 22 (Salvage and Second-Hand
Goods Businesses), 25 (Taxicabs - Cab Broker only), 29 (Trades)
51. Subsection 1 (0) of Schedule 1 is amended by deleting the words "district or
zone" and replacing them with "district, zone or location".
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 13 of 21
52. Section 5 of Schedule 1 is amended by deleting the words "defined areas or"
and replacing them with "districts, zones or".
53. Section 2 of Appendix "A" of Schedule 1 is amended by deleting subsections
2(e) and 2(g) and by relettering "(f)" as "(a)" and "(h)" as "(b)".
54. Section 3 of Appendix "A" of Schedule 1 is amended by deleting the words
"subsection (2)" and replacing them with "section 2".
55. Paragraph 3(e)(i) of Schedule 3 is amended by deleting the words "Social and".
56. Paragraph 3(2)(e) of Schedule 9 is amended by adding the word "Public" after
"Fire, Police, Building and".
57. Subsection 1 (e) of Schedule 17 is amended by deleting the words "the most
recent inspection conducted under the Health Protection and Promotion Act
and the regulations there under, and which states that the establishment was in
compliance with the conditions required for safe handling of food at the time of
the inspection" and replacing them with "an inspection or inspections conducted
under the Health Protection and Promotion Act or its regulations".
58. Subsection 1 (k) of Schedule 17 is amended by deleting the words "Social and".
59. Subsection 9(a) of Schedule 17 is amended by deleting the words "Building and
Licensing" and replacing them with "Parking and By-Law Services".
60. Subsection 13(1) of Schedule 17 is amended by adding the words ", except go-
karts," after each occurrence of the words "motor vehicles".
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 14 of 21
61. Section 14 of Schedule 17 is amended by adding the new subsections (1) and
(2) and renumbering the subsequent subsections accordingly:
14.( 1) No motor vehicles shall be operated on the track, either for
practice, testing or racing, except on a day on which races are to
be held, and races shall not be held more than one night per
calendar week, not to exceed 25 nights per calendar year, save
as provided in subsection 14(2).
(2) In addition to the regular racing nights provided for in subsection
14( 1), the Licensee shall be permitted to hold races on 8
additional nights per calendar year and the Licensee shall
disclose in writing and in advance the dates of such 8 additional
nights to the Issuer of Licences.
62. Subsection 14(1) of Schedule 17, renumbered as 14(3) under section 61, is
amended by deleting "14(3)" after "dates permitted in subsection" and replacing
it with" 14( 2)" .
63. Paragraph 14(1 )(c) of Schedule 17, renumbered as 14(3)(c) under section 61,
is amended by deleting "14(1)(b)" after "specified in paragraph" and replacing it
with "14(3)(b)".
64. Subsection 14(2) of Schedule 17, renumbered as 14(4) under section 61, is
amended by deleting the sentence "In addition to the regular racing dates, the
Licensee shall be permitted to hold races on eight additional dates per calendar
year."
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 15 of 21
65. Subsection 14(4) of Schedule 17, renumbered as 14(6) under section 61, is
amended by deleting the words "rights detailed in section 8" and replacing them
with "nights provided for in subsection 14(2)".
66. Section 20 of Schedule 17 is amended by deleting the words "Public Health
Act" and replacing them with "Health Protection and Promotion Act".
67. Section 28 of Schedule 17 is amended by deleting the words "section 7" and
replacing them with "section 14".
68. Paragraph 4(b )(i) and sections 23, 26 and 27 of Schedule 18 are each
amended by deleting the words "Social and".
69. Paragraph 1 (1 )(a) of Schedule 19 is amended by deleting the words "the most recent
inspection conducted under the Health Protection and Promotion Act and the
regulations there under, and which states that the establishment was in compliance
with the conditions required for safe handling of food at the time of the inspection" and
replacing them with "an inspection or inspections conducted under the Health
Protection and Promotion Act or its regulations".
70. Paragraph 1 (1 )(b) and section 11 of Schedule 19 are each amended by
deleting the words "Social and".
71. Subsection 6(2) of Schedule 19 is deleted and replaced by the following new
subsection:
6(2) A person, being the owner or operator of a licensed eating
establishment may operate a refreshment vehicle on the premises
of the eating establishment without complying with paragraph
8(1 )(c)(ii) by being a certain distance from an eating
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 16 of 21
establishment, and without requiring the written permission of
other eating establishments as provided in this section.
72. Paragraph 1 (I)(i) of Schedule 20 is amended by adding the word "Services"
after "Building".
73. Paragraphs 1 (I)(iii) and 1 (I)(iv) of Schedule 20 are each amended by deleting
the words "Social and".
74. Subsection 45(4) of Schedule 20 is amended by deleting the words "and
Community" .
75. Subsection 1(c) of Schedule 21 is amended by deleting the words "the most
recent inspection conducted under the Health Protection and Promotion Act
and the regulations there under, and which states that the establishment was in
compliance with the conditions required for safe handling of food at the time of
the inspection" and replacing them with "an inspection or inspections conducted
under the Health Protection and Promotion Act or its regulations".
76. Subsection 1(e) of Schedule 21 is amended by deleting the words "Social and".
77. Subsection 2(2) of Schedule 21 is deleted and replaced by the following new
subsection:
(2) A person who holds a current and valid licence under this Schedule
shall not be required to obtain a licence under Schedule 19 in
respect of a refreshment vehicle they operate or own that is
operating on the premises of their licensed eating establishment,
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 17 of 21
provided that all provisions under Schedule 19 respecting such a
refreshment vehicle shall apply.
78. Subsection 3(b) of Schedule 23 is amended by deleting the words "and
Licensing" and replacing them with "Services".
79. Paragraph 1(1)(y) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "Building &
Licensing" and replacing them with "Parking and By-law Services".
80. Section 6 of Schedule 25 is deleted and replaced with the following new sections:
6. A conveyance by means of a motor vehicle that:
(a) is owned by the City of Hamilton, the Hamilton Street Railway
Company or the Disabled and Regional Transit System
(hereinafter called "DARTS"); and
(b) is operated by or on behalf of the City of Hamilton as part of a
public transportation service, including a public transportation
service for the transportation of senior citizens or disabled
persons
is exempt from Schedule 8 and Schedule 25.
6a. A conveyance by means of a motor vehicle that:
(a) is not owned by the City of Hamilton, the Hamilton Street Railway
Company or DARTS; and
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 18 of 21
(b) is operated by or on behalf of the City of Hamilton as part of a
public transportation service, including a public transportation
service for the transportation of senior citizens or disabled
persons
is exempt only from the fare provisions of this Schedule and not from
any other provision under Schedule 8 or Schedule 25.
6b. For the purposes of section 6 and section 6a, "owned" includes any
arrangement for possession and control of a motor vehicle.
81. Subsection 14(b) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "and/or By-
law 07-170" and replacing them with "this By-law and/or the City's User Fees and
Charges By-law".
82. Section 16 of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "at the time of
enactment of this Schedule" and replacing them with "on May 28, 2003" and by
deleting the words "within three (3) years from the date of the enactment of this
Schedule" and replacing them with "before May 29,2006".
83. Subsection 20(b) of Schedule 25 is amended by adding the words "pursuant to
this Schedule, the Fees Schedule, this By-law and/or the City's User Fees and
Charges By-law" between ""all required fees" and "and completes and files".
84. Subsection 20(d) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the final sentence of
paragraph 20(d)(ii) and replacing it with the following new sentence applying to
the whole of the subsection:
This subsection takes effect on May 29, 2008.
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 19 of 21
85. Subsection 20(r) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "Upon
enactment of this Schedule".
86. Subsection 22(b) of Schedule 25 is amended by adding the words "pursuant to
this Schedule, the Fees Schedule, this By-law and/or the City's User Fees and
Charges By-law" between ""all required fees" and "and completes and files".
87. Section 24 of Schedule 25 is deleted including the heading "TERMS AND
CONDITIONS" but shall continue to be noted as "24. Repealed." After section 23
and no subsequent provisions shall be renumbered or relettered.
88. Paragraph 28(8)(c) and subsection 39(3) of Schedule 25 are each amended by
deleting the word "Department" and replacing it with "Division".
89. Subsection 29(8) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "the
enactment of this Schedule" and replacing them with "May 28, 2003".
90. Subsection 29(9) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "at the
enactment of this Schedule" and replacing them with "as of May 28,2003".
91. The title immediately preceding section 46 of Schedule 25 is deleted and
replaced with the following new title:
TRANSFER OF OWNER'S LICENCE
92. Subsection 49(21) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "Effective
five years from the date of enactment of this Schedule" and replacing them with
"As of May 29,2008".
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 20 of 21
93. Paragraph 50(1 )(d) of Schedule 25 is deleted and the subsequent paragraph is
relettered accordingly.
94. Subparagraph 65( 1)( 0 )(ii) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "at
the time of enactment of this Schedule" and replacing them with "as of May 28,
2003" and by deleting the words "the second anniversary of the date of
enactment of this Schedule" and replacing them with "May 28,2005".
95. Subsection 70(1) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "Director of
Building & Licensing, Planning & Development" and replacing them with "Director,
Parking and By-law Services, Planning and Economic Development Department".
96. Section 73 of Schedule 25 is deleted and replaced by the following new section:
73. Pursuant to the provisions of section 431 of the Municipal Act.
2001, when a person has been convicted of an offence under
this Schedule, the court in which the conviction has been
entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may,
in addition to any other penalty or order imposed, make an order
prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the offence by the
person convicted.
97. Subsection 7(3) of Schedule 30 is amended by deleting the word "the" after
"transient trader shall cause" and replacing it with "their".
98. Section 1 of Schedule 31 is amended by having the first two title rows of the table
appear on each page of the table.
By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 21 of 21
99. The section entitled "RENEW" in Schedule 31 is renumbered as 2 and is
amended by having the first two title rows of the table appear on each page of
the table.
100. This By-law comes into force on the date it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 28th day of May, 2008.
Chad Co ins
Acting Mayor



Content from 08154 lntegrity commissioner bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 9, Committee of the Whole
Report 08-020
CM: June 11,2008
Bill No. 154
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-1 54
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
WHEREAS Council desires to provide for an lntegrity Commissioner to help
ensure that members of Council conform to ethical standards of behaviour in
carrying out their duties and are held to account for adherence to their Code of
Conduct and any other applicable City procedures, rules or policies;
AND WHEREAS section 223.3 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25,
authorizes the City of Hamilton to appoint an lntegrity Commissioner who
performs functions with respect to the application of the Code of Conduct for
members of Council and other procedures, rules or policies governing their
ethical behaviour;
AND WHEREAS sections 223.4 to 223.8 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, provide that an lntegrity Commissioner appointed under section 223.3 has
certain powers, duties and protections, including: the powers of a commission
under Parts I and II of the Public Inquiries Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.41; the duty to
preserve secrecy with respect to all matters that come to their knowledge in the
course of performing their functions; and the protection of not being a competent
or compellable witness in a civil proceeding;
AND WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.
25, authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or desirable for
municipal purposes, and in particular paragraph 2 of subsection lO(2) authorizes
by-laws respecting the accountability and transparency of the municipality and its
operations;
AND WHEREAS sections 23.1 and 23.2 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, authorize the City of Hamilton to delegate its powers and duties, including
legislative and quasi-judicial powers under the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.
25, to an individual who is an officer, employee or agent of the City of Hamilton;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 2 of 14
Definitions
1. In this By-law:
(a) "City" means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic
area of the City of Hamilton, as the context requires;
(b) "Code of Conduct" means the Code of Conduct for members of
Council, as approved by Council from time to time, as it existed on the
date of the event or events giving rise to a Complaint;
(c) "Complaint" means a request by City Council, a member of Council, a
City employee, a City resident, or a person who has business,
institutional or other premises in the City, that the lntegrity
Commissioner conduct an inquiry into an event or series of events
alleged to contravene the Code of Conduct or any other procedures,
rules or policies governing the ethical behaviour of members of
Council;
(d) "Complainant" means a person who makes a Complaint;
(e) "Council" means the City's Council;
(f) "judge" means an individual appointed as a judge under s. 96 of the
Constitution Act, 1867; or an individual appointed as a judge of the
Ontario Court of Justice, or an equivalent Court in another Canadian
Province or Territory;
(g) "Municipal Act" means the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, as
amended;
(h) "Municipal Freedom of lnformation and Protection of Privacy Act"
means the Municipal Freedom of lnformation and Protection of Privacy
Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. M.56, as amended; and
(i) "Public lnquiries Act", means the Public Inquiries Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.
P.41, as amended.
Appointment
2. Council shall appoint a former judge who has retired from office to be
lntegrity Commissioner for a fixed term of office, such term to be
established by Council at the time of the appointment.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 3 of 14
3. Without limiting Council's authority to appoint an individual as lntegrity
Commissioner under section 2, the lntegrity Commissioner may be:
(a) a full or part-time City employee;
(b) retained by Council on a term contract based on "fee for service";
(c) cross-appointed by Council together with one or more other municipal
councils as the lntegrity Commissioner for all of the municipalities
making the cross-appointment; or
(d) cross-appointed by Council to perform one or more of the other
functions authorized under Part V.l of the Municipal Act, provided that
those functions are and remain compatible with the Integrity
Commissioner's functions under this By-law.
4. The lntegrity Commissioner shall be paid such remuneration and
expenses as are determined or directed to be determined by Council.
5. The lntegrity Commissioner may be removed for cause, before the expiry
of their term of office, by Council.
Role
6. The role of the lntegrity Commissioner is to help ensure that members of
Council perform their functions in accordance with the Code of Conduct
and other procedures, rules or policies governing their ethical behaviour.
Duties
7. The lntegrity Commissioner shall:
(a) Prepare written materials for distribution to and use by members of
Council regarding the role of the lntegrity Commissioner and ethical
obligations and responsibilities of members of Council under the Code
of Conduct and any other procedures, rules or policies governing their
ethical behaviour.
(b) Prepare written materials and content for the City's web site for
distribution to and use by the public to aid in their understanding of the
role of the lntegrity Commissioner and ethical obligations and
responsibilities of members of Council under their Code of Conduct
and any other procedures, rules or policies governing their ethical
behaviour.
(c) At least once each Council term, deliver an oral presentation to
members of Council regarding the role of the lntegrity Commissioner
and ethical obligations and responsibilities of members of Council
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 4 of 14
under their Code of Conduct and any other procedures, rules or
policies governing their ethical behaviour.
(d) Upon request, provide advice to individual members of Council
regarding their ethical obligations and responsibilities under their Code
of Conduct and any other procedures, rules or policies governing their
ethical behaviour.
(e) Provide advice and recommendations to Council regarding
amendments to the Code of Conduct and any other procedures, rules
or policies governing their ethical behaviour.
(f) Prepare and deliver an annual report to Council containing a summary
of their activities during the calendar year.
Making A Complaint Regarding A Member Of Council
8.(1) Council may refer a Complaint directly to the lntegrity Commissioner.
(2) A Complaint referred to the lntegrity Commissioner under subsection (1)
shall contain the information required to complete Appendix A to this By-
law, but is not required to be in the form of an affidavit.
(3) No fee under section 12 is payable with respect to a Complaint referred to
the lntegrity Commissioner under this section.
9. A Complainant may make a Complaint regarding a member of Council by
filing with the City Clerk a completed and swornlaffirmed Appendix A to
this By-law together with the fee under section 12, and the City Clerk shall
forward such a Complaint, without added comment, to the lntegrity
Commissioner.
10. A Complainant filing a Complaint under section 9, may file the completed
and swornlaffirmed Appendix A to this Bylaw in a sealed envelope and the
City Clerk shall forward the Complaint to the lntegrity Commissioner
unopened.
11. A Complaint regarding a member of Council shall not be made available to
the public except as may be required under the Municipal Freedom of
Information and Protection of Privacy Act.
Refundable Fee
12.(1) A Complainant shall pay to the City Clerk a refundable fee in the amount
of $100.00 upon the filing of a Complaint under section 9.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 5 of 14
(2) The fee payable under subsection (1) shall be refunded to the
Complainant when the lntegrity Commissioner files their report under
section 22, except as may otherwise be required under this By-law.
(3) Where a Complaint is found to be frivolous, vexatious, or not made in
good faith under section 18, the fee shall not be refunded.
(4) Where a Complaint has been stayed under section 17, a Complainant
may withdraw their Complaint and receive a refund of the fee.
Limitation Period
13.(1) Except as provided for in this section or section 32, the lntegrity
Commissioner shall not proceed with an inquiry in regard to a Complaint
which is filed with the City Clerk more than 42 days after the date when
the event or series of events which are the subject matter of the Complaint
were discovered by the Complainant.
(2) An event, or series of events, is discovered on the earlier of:
(a) the date upon which the Complaint first knew,
(i) that the event, or series of events, had occurred,
(ii) that the event, or series of events, constituted a contravention of
the Code of Conduct, and
(iii) the identity of the member of Council involved in the event or
series of events; and
(b) the date on which a reasonable person with the abilities and in the
circumstances of the Complainant first ought to have known of the
matters referred to in paragraph (2)(a).
(3) A Complainant is deemed to have known the matters referred to in
paragraph (2)(a) on the date the event, or series of events, occurred,
unless the contrary is proven, the onus of which proof lies upon the
Complainant.
(4) Where, pursuant to this section, the lntegrity Commissioner decides not to
proceed with an inquiry they shall prepare and file a report under section
22, which applies with necessary modifications, setting out that decision.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 6 of 14
Inquiry Into A Complaint Regarding A Member Of Council
14. Where a Complaint regarding a member of Council is received by the
lntegrity Commissioner, they shall conduct an inquiry promptly, thoroughly
and in a manner that ensures the member of Council who is the subject of
the Complaint is given an opportunity to know the nature of the Complaint
against them and to make representations respecting the Complaint to the
lntegrity Commissioner.
15. Information concerning the nature of a Complaint disclosed to a member
of Council under section 14 shall be used by the member only for the
purpose of making representations respecting the Complaint to the
lntegrity Commissioner and not for any other purpose.
16. In conducting an inquiry into a Complaint regarding a member of Council,
the lntegrity Commissioner may exercise any power given to them under
this By-law or under Part V.l of the Municipal Act, including the power to
conduct or not to conduct an inquiry under the Public Inquiries Act.
17.(1) If the lntegrity Commissioner is satisfied that a Complaint regarding a
member of Council does not contain sufficient information to set out a
prima facie contravention of the Code of Conduct or other procedures,
rules or policies governing a member of Council's ethical behaviour, they
shall stay the inquiry into the Complaint.
(2) Before staying an inquiry under subsection (I), the lntegrity Commissioner
shall give the Complainant an opportunity to provide additional information
respecting the Complaint and in doing so shall explain to the Complainant
what additional information would be required to set out a prima facie
contravention of the Code of Conduct or other procedures, rules or
policies governing a member of Council's ethical behaviour.
(3) Where the Complainant provides additional information under subsection
(2), the lntegrity Commissioner shall consider all of the information
provided and shall reassess whether there is sufficient information to set
out a prima facie contravention of the Code of Conduct or other
procedures, rules or policies governing a member of Council's ethical
behaviour.
(4) Where the lntegrity Commissioner has stayed an inquiry into a Complaint
and, after the stay, additional information is provided which, on its own or
together with the information provided before the stay, sets out a prima
facie contravention of the Code of Conduct or other procedures, rules or
policies governing a member of Council's ethical behaviour, the lntegrity
Commissioner shall lift the stay and conduct the inquiry.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 7 of 14
18.(1) If the lntegrity Commissioner is satisfied, after considering the information
contained in a Complaint and any other relevant information, that a
Complaint regarding a member of Council is frivolous, vexatious or not
made in good faith, they shall not conduct an inquiry or, where that
becomes apparent in the course of an inquiry, shall terminate the inquiry.
(2) Where, pursuant to subsection (I), the lntegrity Commissioner decides not
to proceed with an inquiry they shall prepare and file a report under
section 22, which applies with necessary modifications, setting out that
decision.
Penalties and Delegation Regarding a Contravention by a Member of
Council
19. The penalties for a member of Council who contravenes the Code of
Conduct or other procedures, rules or policies governing the member's
ethical behaviour shall be those authorized under subsection 233.4(5) of
the Municipal Act, namely:
(a) a reprimand;
(b) suspension of remuneration paid to the member in respect of the
member's services as a member of Council for period of up to 90
days.
20.(1) The power to impose the penalties under section 19 is delegated to the
lntegrity Commissioner.
(2) Except as otherwise provided in this By-law, the lntegrity Commissioner
shall not delegate the power to impose the penalties under section 19, but
shall exercise the power personally even where an inquiry into a
Complaint is conducted or reported on by a delegate of the lntegrity
Commissioner under section 33.
21. A penalty imposed by the lntegrity Commissioner takes effect immediately
upon the filing of their report on the inquiry with the City Clerk.
Reporting An Inquiry Into A Complaint Regarding a Member of Council
22.(1) Where the lntegrity Commissioner has completed an inquiry into a
Complaint regarding a member of Council, they shall, within 60 days of
completing the evidence gathering and investigation portion of the inquiry,
prepare and file with the City Clerk a report to Council regarding the
inquiry.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 8 of 14
(2) Where, in the opinion of the lntegrity Commissioner, it is not possible to
prepare and file a report to Council within the time set out in subsection
(I), they may advise Council of this together with the reasons for their
inability to prepare and file the report to Council and request an extension
of time for the preparation and filing of the report. Council may, after
considering the request, grant the lntegrity Commissioner permission to
file their report on or before a new fixed date.
23. The lntegrity Commissioner shall provide a copy of their report filed under
section 22 to the Complainant, to the member of Council who is the
subject of the Complaint and to all other members of Council at the same
time as filing the report with the City Clerk.
24. The report filed under section 22 shall include:
(a) the nature of the Complaint;
(b) the evidence gathered from the Complaint and from the inquiry;
(c) the Commissioner's findings of fact regarding the Complaint, which
findings shall be made in accordance with the civil standard on the
balance of probabilities;
(d) the Commissioner's decision, based on the findings of fact, that the
member of Council contravened or did not contravene the Code of
Conduct or other procedures, rules or policies governing a member of
Council's ethical behaviour;
(e) where the Commissioner decides that the member of Council has
contravened the Code of Conduct or other procedures, rules or
policies governing the member's ethical behaviour, the penalty under
section 19, if any, to be imposed, including a copy of a letter of
reprimand, if imposed, or a copy of the notice of suspension of
remuneration, if imposed.
Where the lntegrity Commissioner's delegate under s. 33 decides that a
member of Council has contravened the Code of Conduct or other
procedures, rules or policies governing the member's ethical behaviour
but that the member was acting in accordance with the Commissioner's
advice given under subsection 7(d) and had, before receiving this advice,
disclosed to the Commissioner all the relevant facts that were known to
the member, the delegate shall so state in the report under section 22 and
no penalty shall be imposed.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 9 of 14
26.(1) Where the lntegrity Commissioner imposes a penalty suspending the
remuneration paid to a member of Council, they shall notify the General
Manager of Finance and Corporate Services of the suspension and the
period of time of the suspension.
(2) The General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services shall ensure the
remuneration of the member of Council is suspended in accordance with
the notice of the lntegrity Commissioner under subsection (1).
27. Where the lntegrity Commissioner has filed a report in respect of an
inquiry with the City Clerk under section 22, the City Clerk shall place the
report on the next available Council Agenda as an information item.
Budget For The Office Of The lntegrity Commissioner
28.(1) The lntegrity Commissioner shall submit an annual budget directly to
Council during the City's budget process.
(2)The budget submitted under subsection (1) shall contain all anticipated
costs and expenses for the operation of the office of the lntegrity
Commissioner for the calendar year, excepting only expenses for the
conduct of an inquiry under the Public lnquiries Act.
(3) The costs and expenses for the operation of the office of the lntegrity
Commissioner under subsection (2) may include hiring staff, arranging for
facilities or obtaining expert services, as the lntegrity Commissioner
considers necessary to perform their functions.
29.(1) If the lntegrity Commissioner is satisfied that it is necessary to exercise
any of the powers under the Public lnquiries Act to complete an inquiry,
they shall prepare and file, forthwith, with the City Clerk a report to Council
setting out the circumstances and reasons for the exercise of these
powers.
(2) The report under subsection (1) shall:
(a) set out the efforts which the lntegrity Commissioner has made to
gather necessary evidence and to otherwise complete the inquiry
without resorting to the exercise of powers under the Public lnquiries
Act;
(b) explain why the lntegrity Commissioner considers it necessary to
exercise the powers under the Public lnquiries Act;
(c) set out the steps which the lntegrity Commissioner anticipates taking
under the Public lnquiries Act; and
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 10 of 14
(d) explain how the steps set out in paragraph (2)(c) will comply with
subsection (5).
(3) Where the lntegrity Commissioner has filed a report with the City Clerk
under subsection (I), the City Clerk shall place the report on the next
available Council Agenda as an information item.
(4) Subsequent to filing their report under subsection (I), the lntegrity
Commissioner shall provide, forthwith, to the General Manager of Finance
and Corporate Services, an estimate of all anticipated casts and expenses
which will be incurred in exercising the powers under the Public Inquiries
Act.
(5)The lntegrity Commissioner shall ensure that all reasonable steps are
taken to minimize the anticipated costs and expenses without hampering
the ability of the lntegrity Commissioner to complete the inquiry.
(6)Where the lntegrity Commissioner becomes aware that the costs and
expenses may exceed the estimate under subsection (4), they shall
provide forthwith a revised estimate to the General Manager of Finance
and Corporate Services.
7)Upon being provided with an estimate under subsection (4) or a revised
estimate under subsection (6), the General Manager of Finance and
Corporate Services shall make provision for the payment of costs and
expenses and shall report to Council regarding the amount of the estimate
or the revised estimate for Council's information and, if necessary, for
Council to consider the source of funding.
Confidentiality
30(1) The lntegrity Commissioner is entitled to have access to such information
belonging to or used by the City, including legal advice that has been
given to Council, Standing Committees, the Board of Health or City
Departments, as they are satisfied is necessary to conduct an inquiry.
(2) A disclosure to the lntegrity Commissioner of legal advice under
subsection (1) :
(a) shall be deemed not to constitute a waiver of solicitor-client privilege;
(b) shall be used only for the purpose of conducting an inquiry and not for
any other purpose; and
(c) the contents or substance of such legal advice shall not be disclosed in
any public report prepared by the lntegrity Commissioner or any
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 11 of 14
person acting under the instructions of the Commissioner, including their
delegate under section 33.
31. The lntegrity Commissioner and every person acting under the
instructions of the Commissioner, including their delegate under section
33:
(a) shall preserve the secrecy of all confidential documents, material or
information, whether belonging to the City or not, that come into their
possession or to their knowledge in the course of their duties; and
(b) without limiting the obligation to preserve secrecy under subsection (a),
shall ensure that they and, in particular, any reports they prepare,
comply at all times with the Municipal Freedom of Information and
Protection of Privacy Act and with the Council Procedure By-law
regarding personal and personnel information.
No Complaints 90 Days Prior To A Municipal Election
32.(1) Despite any other provision of this bylaw, no Complaint may be referred to
the lntegrity Commissioner under section 8, or filed with the City Clerk
under section 9, 90 days immediately prior to the date of a regular election
held pursuant to the Municipal Elections Act, 1996, S.O. 1996, Chapter
32, as amended.
(2) The 90 days under subsection (1) shall not be included in the calculation
of the 42 days under subsection 13(1).
General Provisions
33.(1) The lntegrity Commissioner may, in writing, delegate their duties to
conduct an inquiry, including the exercise of powers under the Public
lnquiries Act.
(2) Notwithstanding subsection (I), the lntegrity Commission shall, in writing,
delegate their duties to conduct an inquiry, including the exercise of
powers under the Public Inquiries Act, their duties to report on an inquiry
and the power to impose either of the penalties under section 19, where
the Commissioner:
(a) has provided advice to an individual member of Council under
subsection 7(d) and
(i) the member of Council is the subject of the Complaint, and
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 12 of 14
(ii) the advice was provided under subsection 7(d) in respect to the
subject matter of the Complaint; or
(b) has an actual or apparent conflict of interest.
(3) In making a delegation under subsections (1) or (2), the lntegrity
Commission shall first satisfy themselves that the person to whom the
duties are to be delegated is fully capable of carrying these duties out.
(4) The lntegrity Commissioner may, at any time, revoke a delegation made
under subsection (1) and carry out the delegated duties themselves.
(5) The lntegrity Commissioner may, at any time, revoke a delegation made
under subsection (2) and make another delegation under subsections (2)
and (3).
34. If the lntegrity Commissioner, when conducting an inquiry, determines that there are
reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a contravention of any other Act or of
the Criminal Code (Canada), the Commissioner shall immediately refer the matter to the
appropriate authorities and suspend the inquiry until any resulting police investigation and
charge have been finally disposed of, and shall report the suspension to Council.
35. Appendix A which is attached to this By-law forms a part of it.
36. This By-law may be referred to as the lntegrity Commissioner By-law.
37. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 1l tdhay o f June, 2008.
0
Kevin C. Christenson
Mayor 1 City Clerk
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 13 of 14
Appendix A
Please note that a member of Council who is the subject of a Complaint under section 9
of the lntegrity Commissioner By-law will be informed of the identity of the Complainant.
Affidavit
(Complaint under section 9 of the lntegrity Commissioner By-law)
Affidavit of [full name]
1, [full name], of the
CitylTownlother of [municipality of residence] in the
Province of Ontario
MAKE OATH AND SAYIAFFIRM:
1. I am a member of the City of Hamilton's Councilla City of Hamilton employee1 a City of
Hamilton residentla person who has business, institutional or other premises in the City
of Hamilton.
2. 1 have personal knowledge of the facts as set out in this affidavit because
[insert reason(s), e.g. I work
for. . . , I attended the meeting at which . . ., etc.].
3. 1 have reasonable and probable grounds to believe that a member of the City of Hamilton's
Council, [name of member], has contravened
section(s) [specify section(s)] of the Code of Conduct for members of the
City of Hamilton's Council1 other procedure, rule or policy, the particulars of which are as
follows:
[Set out the statements of fact in consecutively numbered paragraphs in the space below, with each
paragraph being confined as far as possible to a particular statement of fact.
If you require more space, please attach an additional page or pages, numbered consecutively, with a
statement at the top of each additional page that the contents form part of this affidavit.
If you wish to include documents or other exhibits to support this Complaint, please refer to them as
Exhibit A, B, etc. and attach them to this affidavit.
If you are relying on the information of others, please indicate this and identify the source of the
information by name, providing contact information if possible.]
--- - --
[specify the number of additional pages, if any, attached] pages are attached.
To Establish The Office Of lntegrity Commissioner
Page 14 of 14
If you are filing this Complaint more than six months after the date of the event or series of events which
form the basis of the Complaint, you should review section 13 of the lntegrity Commissioner By-law and
include all necessary information regarding the reasons why your date of discovery is later than the
deemed date of discovery under that section.
4. This affidavit is made for the purpose of making a Complaint for consideration by the City of
Hamilton's lntegrity Commission and for no other purpose.
SWORNIAFFIRMED before me at )
the CityITownletc. of )
)
in the Province of Ontario on )
[date]. )
1
A Commissioner for taking affidavits, etc.) [signature]
[signature of Commissioner] )
Signing a false affidavit may expose you to prosecution under section 131 and 132 or 134
of the Criminal Code (Canada) and also to civil liability for defamation.
Notice of Collection of Personal lnformation
pursuant to
the Municipal Freedom of lnformation and Protection of Privacy Act (MFIPPA)
Personal information contained on this form is collected under the authority of the Municipal Act,
2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, as amended, and will be used for the purposes of an inquiry by the
lntegrity Commissioner into a Complaint regarding a member of Council pursuant to the lntegrity
Commissioner Bylaw. Questions about this collection may be directed to: (need to insert details
of either City Clerk or the lntegrity Commissioner)



Content from 08175 to amend bylaw no 07170 to license and regulate various businesses taxicab farespdf:
Authority: Item 15, Economic Development
&Planning Committee
Report; 08-014 (PED08154)
CM: July 10,2008
Bill No. 175
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-175
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-1 70;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to By-law 07-170 as
hereinafter set out;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Appendix 1 of Schedule 25 is deleted and replaced with the following new
appendix:
Schedule 25
Appendix 1 (Taxicab TarifflFares)
Meter and By Agreement Rates
The Meter and By Agreement Rates as approved by Council are set as follows:
For the first 71.4 meters or part thereof $3.20
For each additional 71.4 meters or part of thereof $0.1 3 ($?.821km)
For waiting time while under engagement
for each 14 (fourteen) seconds
Livery or meter cabs by agreement (per hour) $37.00
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 2 of 2
Senior Citizens receive a 10% reduction on the above Meter Rates calculated
on the highest FULL dollar registered on the taxi meter.
The above rates include the Federal Goods and Services Tax.
In accordance with section 68 of this By-law, promotional discount fares are
prohibited subject to the written consent of the Issuer of Licences.
2. The second section 5 of Appendix 4 of Schedule 25 entitled "Passenger Bill of
Rights" is renumbered as "7".
3. Section 7 of Appendix 4 of Schedule 25 entitled "Passenger Bill of Rights" is
renumbered as "8" and amended by deleting the address:
Standards &Licensing
City Hall
71 Main Street West, 3rdF loor
Hamilton, ON L8P 4Y5
and replacing it with the following new address:
Municipal Law Enforcement
77 James Street North, Suite 400
Hamilton, ON L8R 2K3
4. This By-law comes into force on the date it is passed.
0PASSED and ENACTED this 10" day of July, 2008.
//
Kevin C. Christenson
(Acting Mayor City Clerk
S&-



Content from 08225 to amend bylaw no 07170 to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 11, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report: 08-017 (PED08194)
CM: September 24,2008
Bill No. 225
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-225
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton enacted a by-law to license and regulate
various businesses being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-1 70;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the deletion of Schedule 15 of By-law No.
07-1 70;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subparagraph 6(l)(e)(i) and Section 30 of the General Provisions of By-law No.
07-17 0 are amended by deleting "Schedule 15 Public Baths".
2. Appendices "A" and "B" of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 are
amended by deleting the "Public Baths" row.
3. Appendix "D" of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting "15 (Public Baths)".
4. The table under Section 1 of Schedule 31 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting the "Public Baths" row.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
(Page 2 of 2)
5. The table under Section 2 of Schedule 31 of By-law No. 07-1 70 is amended by
deleting the "Public Baths" row.
6. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 24th day of September, 2008
-
L
R
Fred Eisenber-g er Bvin G. Ghristenson
V
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08238 to amend property standards bylaw no 03117pdf:
Authority: Item 17, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 08- 019 (PED07239(a))
CM: October 15,2008
Bill No. 238
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-238
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-117 Respecting:
HERITAGE PROPERTIES DESIGNATED
UNDER THE ONTARIO HERITAGE ACT
WHEREAS a by-law passed under Section 15.1 of the Building Code Act, 1992
prescribing standards for the maintenance and occupancy of property within the
municipality, namely City of Hamilton By-law No. 03-1 17 (the Property Standards By-
law), is in effect in the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS under Sections 35.3 and 45.1 of the Ontario Heritage Act, R.S.O.
1990, c.0.18, a by-law may be passed by the Council of the City of Hamilton prescribing
minimum standards for the maintenance of heritage attributes of designated properties
or properties situated in a heritage conservation district provided that a by-law passed
under Section 15.1 of the Building Code Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c.23, is in effect in the
City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton deems it necessary to amend By-
.. . .
law No. 03-1 17 to include minimum standard provisions for designated heritage
properties pursuant to Subsections 35.3 and 45.1 of the Ontario Heritage Act, R.S.0
1990, c. 0.18;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 2 of 8)
1. Section 2 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is amended by deleting the word "and" at the end
of Paragraphs 2(1 )(dd) and 2(1 )(ff).
2. Section 2 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is further amended by adding the phrase ", a Part
IV heritage property and a Part V heritage property" after the words "vacant
property" at the end of Paragraph 2(1 )(u).
3. Section 2 of By-law No. 03-117 is further amended by adding the following
paragraphs immediately after Paragraph 2(1)(gg):
(hh) "Part IV heritage property" means real property, including all buildings and
structures thereon, which has been designated by the City of Hamilton or
any of its former municipalities under Section 29 of the Ontario Heritage
Act,
or which has been designated by the Minister under Section 34.5 of
the Ontario Heritage Act;
(ii) "Part V heritage property" means real property, including all buildings and
structures thereon, located within a heritage conservation district, which
has been designated by the City of Hamilton or any of its former
municipalities under Section 41 of the Ontario Heritage Act; and,
(jj) "heritage attribute" means, in relation to real property, and to the buildings
on the real property, an attribute of the property, building or structure that
contributes to its cultural heritage value or interest and that is defined or
described:
i. in a by-law designating a property passed under Section 29, Part
IV, of the Ontario Heritage Act and identified as a heritage attribute,
reason for designation or otherwise;
ii. in a Minister's order made under Section 34.5, Part IV, of the
Ontario Heritage Act and identified as a heritage attribute or
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 3 of 8)
otherwise;
iii. in a by-law designating a heritage conservation district passed
under Section 41, Part V, of the Ontario Heritage Act and identified
as a heritage attribute or otherwise; or,
iv. in the supporting documentation required for a by-law designating a
heritage conservation district, including but not limited to a heritage
conservation district plan, assessment or inventory, and identified
as heritage attributes or otherwise.
4. Section 3 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is amended by adding the phrase "provided that
no building or structure on a Part IV heritage property or a Part V heritage
property shall be altered or cleared, including but not limited to removed,
demolished or relocated, except in accordance with the Ontario Heritage Act"
after the words "levelled condition'' in Subsection 3(3).
5. Section 3 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is further amended by adding the following
Subsection immediately after Subsection 3(4):
3(5) No person, being the owner or occupant of a Part IV heritage property or a
Part V heritage property, shall fail to maintain the property in conformity
with the standards required in this by-law.
6. By-law No. 03-1 17 is amended by adding the following section immediately after
Section 3:
GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL DESIGNATED HERITAGE PROPERTIES
3a(l) In addition to the standards, obligations and requirements that apply to all
property under Sections 4 through 34a both inclusive of this by-law, all
heritage attributes of Part IV heritage properties, including both interior
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 4 of 8)
and exterior heritage attributes, and all heritage attributes of Part V
heritage properties shall be:
(a) maintained so as to prevent deterioration; and,
(b) repaired of any damage.
3a(2) Subject to any applicable provisions of the Ontario Heritage Act:
(a) where Subsection 3a(l) can be complied with by means of repair,
notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the heritage
attribute shall not be replaced and the repair shall be undertaken in
a manner that minimizes damage to the heritage attribute;
(b) where Subsection 3a(l) cannot be complied with by means of
repair, notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the
heritage attribute shall be replaced with material of the same type
as the original material and in keeping with the design, colour,
texture and any other distinctive feature as the original material or
in such a manner as to replicate the design, colour, texture and any
other distinctive feature of the original material.
3a(3)
(a) In addition to the standards, obligations and requirements that
apply to all property under Sections 4 through 34a both inclusive of
this by-law, a part of a Part IV heritage property or a Part V heritage
property, including but not limited to a roof, wall, floor, retaining wall
or foundation, that supports or protects a heritage attribute and
without which the heritage attribute may be at risk of deteriorating
or being damaged shall be structurally sound and maintained in
good repair.
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 5 of 8)
(b) Paragraph 3(a)(3)(a) shall be complied with in a manner that
minimizes damage to the heritage attribute.
7. Section 6 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is amended by adding the following Subsections
immediately after Subsection 6(8):
VACANT AND/OR DAMAGED DESIGNATED HERITAGE PROPERTIES
6(9) Notwithstanding Subsection 6(4), where a building on a Part IV heritage
property or a Part V heritage property remains vacant or unoccupied for a
period of more than ninety (90) days, the owner shall ensure that
appropriate utilities serving the building are connected as required to
provide, maintain and monitor proper heating and ventilation to prevent
damage caused to the building by fluctuating temperatures and humidity.
6(10) Notwithstanding Subsections 6(2), 6(3), 6(5) and 6(6), where a building on
a Part IV heritage property or a Part V heritage property is vacant,
unoccupied or damaged by accident, storm, neglect or other causes or
intentional damage, the owner shall protect the building against the risks
described in Subsections 6(1) and 6(5), and shall effectively prevent the
entrance of all unauthorized persons by closing and securing openings to
the building with boarding:
(a) which completely covers the opening and is properly fitted in a
watertight manner within the side jambs, the head jamb and the
exterior bottom sill of the door or window opening so the exterior
trim and cladding remains uncovered and undamaged by the
boarding;
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 6 of 8)
(b) on window openings, which is painted a matte black to resemble
window glass;
(c) on door openings, which is painted a colour that matches the colour
of the original door;
(d) on an opening other than a window or door opening, which is
painted or otherwise treated so that the colour matches the coloui
of the surrounding exterior of the building; and,
(e) which is fastened securely with screws at least 50mm in length and
installed at appropriate intervals on centre.
6(11) Subject to any applicable provisions of the Ontario Heritaqe Act, where the
minimum standard imposed by Subsection 6(10) has, more than once,
failed to exclude unauthorized entry, and further where the owner's
control, attendance or lack of security measures to protect the Part IV
heritage property or the Part V heritage property suggests that a more
secure option be used, then the owner shall supply such measures,
including such improved security of closures, as may be required by an
officer.
6(12) No window, door or other opening shall be closed or secured in
accordance with Subsection 6(10) with brick, concrete blocking or any
other masonry units and mortar, except where required by an officer under
Subsection 6(11).
8. Section 37 of By-law No. 03-117 is amended by deleting the Subsection 37(3)
and replacing it with the following Subsection:
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 7 of 8)
37(3) Where the cost of doing the work does not exceed $20,000, a Property
Standards Officer is authorized to give immediate effect to any order that
is confirmed or modified as final and binding under Section 15.3(7) of the
Building Code Act, 1992 so as to provide for:
(a) repair of the property; or,
(b) clearing of all buildings, structures or debris from the site and the
leaving of the site in a graded and levelled condition,
provided that no building or structure on a Part IV heritage property or a
Part V heritage property shall be altered or cleared, including but not
limited to removed, demolished or relocated, except in accordance with
the Ontario Heritage Act.
9. Section 39 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is amended by deleting the Subsection 39(2)(b)
and replacing it with the following Subsection:
(b) stating that the site is to be cleared of all buildings, structures, debris, or
refuse and left in a graded and levelled condition, provided that no order in
respect of a Part IV heritage property or a Part V heritage property shall
state that any building or structure is to be altered or cleared, including but
not limited to removed, demolished or relocated;
10. Section 42 of By-law No. 03-1 17 is amended by adding the following Subsection
immediately after Subsection 42(3):
To Amend Property Standards By-Law No. 03-1 17 Respecting Properties Designated
under the Ontario Heritage Act (Page 8 of 8)
42(4) Notwithstanding Subsection 42(1) no building or structure on a Part IV
heritage property or Part V heritage property may be altered or cleared,
including but not limited to removed, demolished or relocated, except in
accordance with the Ontario Heritage Act.
11. This By-law shall come into force and take effect on the date of its passing and
enactment.
PASSED and ENACTED this 15'~da y of October, 2008.
.
1
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor /ActingHy Clerk



Content from 08255 to amend citys licensing code bylaw no 07170 and 2008 user fees bylaw no 08169pdf:
Authority: Item 5, Committee of the Whole
Report 08-030
(PED05215(c)/SPH05066)
CM: October 15,2008
Bill No. 255
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-255
To Amend the Definition of "Lodging House" under By-law No. 07-170 and To Amend
the Fee for a Certificate of Compliance for a lodging house under By-law No. 08-169
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton wishes to amend the definition of "lodging house"
under Schedule 9 of City of Hamilton By-law 07-17 0, the City's Licensing Code;
AND WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton also wishes to amend the fee for a Certificate
of Compliance for a lodging house under Schedule A to By-law 08-169, the City's User Fees
and Charges By-law;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of Schedule 9 of By-law 07-170 is amended by repealing the definition of
"lodging house" and replacing it which the following new definition:
"lodging house" means a house or other building or portion thereof in
which four (4) or more persons are or are intended to be harboured,
received or lodged for hire, where lodging rooms are without kitchen
facilities for the exclusive use of the occupants and where each occupant
does not have access to all of the habitable areas in the building, but
does not include a hotel, hospital, nursing home, home for the young or
the aged or institution if the hotel, hospital, home or institution, is licensed,
approved or supervised under a general or special & t other than the
Municipal Act, 2001.
To Amend the Definition of "Lodging House" under By-law No. 07-170 and To Amend
the Fee for a Certificate of Compliance for a lodging house under By-law No. 08-169
Page 2 of 2
2. Item c) under the heading "Certificate of Compliance" in Schedule A of By-law
08-169 is repealed and replaced by the following new item c):
c)i) A nursing home $225.00 plus $20.00 per n
each permitted resident
ii) A lodging house $225.00 plus $20.00 per n
each person that is or is
intended to be harboured,
received or lodged for hire
PASSED and ENACTED this 2gthd ay of October, 2008.
U
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08267 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to licence and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 11, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report; 08-021 (PED08261)
CM: November 12, 2008
Bil No.267
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-267
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses being City
of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the replacement of Schedules 1 and 13 of City of
Hamilton By-law No. 07-170 and for other amendments to City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-
170;
AND WHEREAS City of Hamilton By-law No. 08-169, the User Fees and Charges By-law,
establishes fees for licences issued under Schedules 1 and 13 of City of Hamilton By-law
07-170;
No.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Every occurrence of the term "adult entertainment parlour" or "adult
entertainment parlours" in By-law No. 07-170 or By-law No. 08-169 is deleted
and replaced with the term "adult entertainment establishment" or "adult
entertainment establishments" respectively.
2. Every occurrence of the term "personal service facility" or "personal service
facilities" in By-law No. 07-170 or By-law No. 08-169 is deleted and replaced
with the term "personal aesthetic services".
3. Appendix "A" of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 2 of 24
deleting the word "Yes" in the column entitled "Fire Approval" for the "Butcher",
"Fish Monger" and "Precious Metals & Jewellery Dealers" rows and replacing it
with "No" and by deleting the word "Yes" in the column entitled "Fire Approval"
for the "Proprietary Club" row and replacing with "N/A".
4. Appendix "B" of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting the words "3 Years" in the column entitled "Fire Approval" for the
"Proprietary Club" row and replacing it with "N/A" and by deleting the words "3
Years" in the column entitled "Fire Approval" for the "Second-hand Shop" row
and replacing it with "No".
5. Schedule 1 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced with the new Schedule
1, entitled "Adult Entertainment Establishments", attached as Appendix A to this
By-law.
6. All licences issued under Schedule 1 which are current and valid on the day this
By-law comes into force shall be deemed to:
(a) be current and valid under the new Schedule 1; and
(b) be subject to all of the applicable provisions of By-law No. 07-170 and the
new Schedule 1, including but not limited to expiring and being renewable as
though they had been issued under the new Schedule 1.
7. All adult services entertainment establishment business owner licence holders
and adult video store licence holders shall comply with subsection 15( d) and
section 16, respectively, of Schedule 1 attached as Appendix A by filing a floor
plan for approval by the Issuer of Licences upon this By-law coming into force
and, if a floor plan is not filed or not approved, the Issuer of Licences may make
a recommendation under section 14 of the General Provisions of By-law No.
07-170.
8. Schedule 13 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule 13, entitled "Personal Aesthetic Services", attached as Appendix B to
this By-law.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 3 of 24
9. All licences issued under Schedule 13 which are current and valid on the day
this By-law comes into force shall be deemed to:
(a) be current and valid under the new Schedule 13; and
(c) be subject to all of the applicable provisions of By-law 07-170 and the new
Schedule 13, including but not limited to expiring and being renewable as
though they had been issued under the new Schedule 13.
10. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 12th day of November, 2008.
..
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 4 of 24
APPENDIX A
SCHEDULE 1
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PART I: DEFINITIONS
1. In this Schedule:
Adult Entertainment Establishment
"adult entertainment establishment" means any premises or part of a
(a)
premises in which are provided, in pursuance of a business, goods or
services appealing to or designed to appeal to erotic or sexual appetites or
inclinations and includes an adult services entertainment establishment and
an adult video store;
Adult Services Entertainment Establishment
"adult services entertainment establishment" means any premises or
(b)
part of a premises in which adult services are provided by one or more
individuals by means of physical movements, verbal expressions, or other
forms of behaviour;
"adult services" means services appealing to or designed to appeal to
( c)
erotic or sexual appetites or inclinations and includes but is not limited to:
services of which a principal feature or characteristic is the nudity, or
(i)
partial nudity of any person;
services in respect of which the word "nude", "naked", "topless",
(ii)
"bottomless", "sexy" or any other word or any picture, symbol or
representation having like meaning or implication is used in any
advertisement; and
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 5 of 24
activities, facilities, performances, dances, exhibitions, viewings and
(iii)
encounters in an adult services entertainment establishment;
(d) "attendant" means any person who provides adult services in an adult
services entertainment establishment;
(e) "business ownet' means a person who owns or occupies or has the right to
own or occupy, an adult services entertainment establishment, and includes
but is not limited to a lessee of an adult services entertainment
establishment or of the premises in which the adult services entertainment
establishment is located;
"main stage" means the primary area within an adult services
(f)
entertainment establishment upon which services are presented, and
excludes areas for the seating of customers;
"operatot' means a person who operates, manages, supervises, controls
(g)
or is responsible for the business of an adult services entertainment
establishment;
"to provide" when used in relation to adult services includes to furnish,
(h)
perform, solicit, or give such services and "providing" and "provision" have
corresponding meanings;
Adult Video Store
"adult video" means a video classified by the Ontario Film Review Board
(i)
as "restricted" and approved by the Ontario Film Review Board as an "adult
sex film";
(j "adult video area" means the part of a Class B adult video store used for
the provision of adult videos;
"adult video store" means a Class A adult video store or a Class B adult
(k)
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 6 of 24
video store;
"Class A adult video store" means any premises where the number of
(I)
adult videos available from the premises exceeds 500, or where the number
of adult videos available from the premises is more than 20% of the videos
available from the premises which are not adult videos, and does not
include a Class B adult video store;
"Class B adult video store" means any premises where the number of
(m)
adult videos available from the premises does not exceed 500 and where
the number of adult videos available from the premises is not more than
20% of the videos available from the premises which are not adult videos,
but does not include premises where the area displaying adult videos is no
more than 5% or 9.3 m2, whichever is less, of the total area displaying
videos on the premises;
"to provide" when used in relation to adult videos includes to sell, offer to
(n)
sell or display for sale, or rental, or sample gift, by retail or otherwise such
adult videos, and "providing" and "provision" have corresponding meanings;
(0) "specified body area" means anyone or more of the following:
in the case of a female person, her areolae; and
(i)
in the case of all persons, the genitals and the anus;
(ii)
(p) "specified sexual activity" means anyone or more of the following: actual
or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, ejaculation, sodomy,
bestiality, oral sexual intercourse, direct physical stimulation of unclothed
genital organs, or flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual
relationship or activity; and
(q) "video" means film, pre-recorded magnetic tape, video and audio cassettes,
and any other medium which may be used to produce images such as
moving pictures, laser discs and laser players, digital video disc (DVD),
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 7 of 24
computer softare and microchips.
PART II: LICENCES
GENERAL
Adult Entertainment Establishment
2. No licence shall be issued to an applicant that is:
(a) a corporation, if anyone of the applicant's officers, directors or shareholders
is less than eighteen years of age;
a partnership, if anyone of the applicant's partners is less than eighteen
(b)
years of age;
(c) an individual, if the individual is less than eighteen years of age.
Adult Services Entertainment Establishment
3. No person shall carry on or in engage in the business of a business owner or
operator of, or an attendant in an adult services entertainment establishment
without holding a current, valid licence issued under this By-law.
4. Only an individual may be issued an operator or an attendant licence.
5. A separate business owner licence or operator licence shall be taken out in respect
of each adult services entertainment establishment.
Where a business owner does not personally operate their adult services
6.(1 )
entertainment establishment, every person operating such adult services
entertainment establishment shall obtain a licence so to do, but nothing herein relieves
such a business owner from the requirement that they obtain a licence as business
owner of such adult services entertainment establishment.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 8 of 24
(2) A business owner who manages their own adult services entertainment establishment
shall notify the Issuer of Licences of this at the time they obtain their licence so that
their licence may be endorsed accordingly and the business owner shall notify the
Issuer of Licences to have the said endorsement amended before engaging any
operator to operate the adult services entertainment establishment.
(3) An operator shall notify the Issuer of Licences of the name of the business owner
whose adult services entertainment establishment they intend to operate at the time
they obtain their licence so that their licence may be endorsed accordingly and the
operator shall notify the Issuer of Licences to have the said endorsement amended
before operating any other adult services entertainment establishment.
(4) The Issuer of Licences shall issue a photo identification card to each licensed
business owner, operator and each licensed attendant. The licence holder shall be
re-photographed every third year or sooner if required by the Issuer of Licences.
7.(1) No adult services entertainment establishment shall be located, and no licence may be
issued, except for adult services entertainment establishments in areas as permitted
by this section, and no licences shall be issued in number greater than permitted by
this section.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), Council may consider a request to substitute a new location
for an existing adult services entertainment establishment location provided that any
requested new location shall conform to the following:
(a) the adult services entertainment establishment shall be located or licensed on
a lot zoned “HH”, “I”, “JJ”, “K”, “KK” or “M-11” under Zoning By-law 6593 of the
former City of Hamilton; and
(b) the lot on which the adult services entertainment establishment is located shall
have a minimum radial separation distance of 500 metres from the lot line to
the lot line of every lot in a residential district or zone.
(3) Subject to this Schedule, the premises at the following municipal addresses licensed
and in actual use as an adult services entertainment establishment on November 12,
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 9 of 24
2008, are each deemed to be a location where one adult services entertainment
establishment is permitted to operate and eligible to be licensed only for so long as the
premises continues to be used for such purposes, the business owner maintains their
licence and the business carried on therein is in compliance with this By-law and all
other applicable law:
(a) 92 Barton Street East, Hamilton;
(b) 95 King Street East, Hamilton;
(c) 1038 Barton Street East, Hamilton.
(4) Subject to subsection (5), the total number of adult services entertainment establishment
business owner licences to be issued under this Schedule is three.
(5) The total number of adult services entertainment establishment licences to be issued
under this Schedule shall be reduced from three, if an adult services entertainment
establishment licence expires without renewal by the licence holder or if a licence is
otherwise surrendered or lawfully revoked, so that the number of licences is reduced to
two.
(6) When the total number of adult services entertainment establishment business owner
licences has been reduced to two and a business owner licence expires without
renewal or a business owner licence is otherwise surrendered or revoked, then
upon receipt of a complete application which otherwise complies with this By-law,
the Issuer of Licences shall carry out a selection process for a licence as follows:
(a) the available business owner licence shall be advertised in the Hamilton
Spectator newspaper and on the City’s website inviting the submission of
applications within a specified period of time;
(b) a draw shall be conducted from all of the submitted, complete applications
which otherwise comply with this By-law; and
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 10 of 24
(c) the winner of the draw may be issued a business owner licence for the
vacant location, or an alternate location approved by Council that conforms
to the criteria set out herein for consideration of a new location.
(7) No business owner shall have an interest, whether as a corporation, a partnership
or an individual, in more than one adult services entertainment establishment
business owner licence.
Adult Video Store
8. No person shall carry on the business of an adult video store without holding a
current, valid licence issued under this By-law.
9. A separate licence shall be taken out in respect of each adult video store.
Class A Adult Video Store
10.( 1) No Class A adult video store shall be located, and no licence may be issued, except
for Class A adult video stores in areas as permitted by this section, and no licences
shall be issued in number greater than permitted by this section.
(2) Subject to subsection (3), Council may consider a request to substitute a new location
for an existing Class A adult video store location provided that any requested new
location shall conform to the following:
(a) the Class A adult video store shall be located or licensed on a lot zoned "HH",
"i", "JJ", "K", "KK" or "M-11" under Zoning By-law 6593 of the former City of
Hamilton; and
(b) the lot on which the Class A adult video store is located shall have a minimum
radial separation distance of 500 metres from the lot line to the lot line of every
lot in a residential district or zone.
(3) Subject to this Schedule, the premises at the following municipal addresses licensed
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 11 of 24
and in actual use as a Class A adult video store on November 12, 2008, are each
deemed to be a location where one Class A adult video store is permitted to operate
and eligible to be licensed only for so long as the premises continues to be used for
such purposes, the licence holder maintains their licence and the business carried on
therein is in compliance with this By-law and all other applicable law:
(a) 8 Fennell Avenue West, Hamilton;
(b) 128 Parkdale Avenue North, Hamilton.
(4) The total number of Class A video store licences to be issued under this Schedule is
two.
(5) When a Class A video store licence expires without renewal or a Class A video
store licence is otherwise surrendered or revoked, then upon receipt of a complete
application which otherwise complies with this By-law, the Issuer of Licences shall
carry out a selection process for a licence as follows:
(a) the available licence shall be advertised in the Hamilton Spectator
newspaper and on the City’s website inviting the submission of applications
within a specified period of time;
(b) a draw shall be conducted from all of the submitted, complete applications
which otherwise comply with this By-law; and
(c) the winner of the draw may be issued a licence for the vacant location, or
an alternate location approved by Council that conforms to the criteria set
out herein for consideration of a new location.
(6) No licence shall be issued under subsection (5) to an applicant who has an interest,
whether as a corporation, a partnership or an individual, in a current and valid Class
A adult video store licence.
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY APPLICANT
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 12 of 24
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY APPLICANT
Adult Entertainment Establishment
11. On every application for a licence or for the renewal of a licence:
(a) the applicant shall attend in person, and not by an agent, at the offce of the
Issuer of Licences to file the application provided by the Issuer of Licences
and shall furnish such information as the Issuer of Licences may direct;
(b) if the applicant is not an individual, the application shall be filed and updated
from time to time as this By-law requires by an individual duly authorized by
the applicant to sign such application on behalf of the applicant and to bind
it, and the individual filing such application shall certify the truth and
completeness of the information provided.
12. When filing an application for a licence, in addition to complying with the General
Provisions of this By-law, an applicant shall file:
(a) if the applicant is a corporation:
a copy of its letters of incorporation or other incorporating document
(i)
certified by the proper government official or department, a copy of
the last information return filed for the corporation and any changes or
corrections to the information it contains;
a list containing the full name of each officer, director and
(ii)
shareholder, the address of their ordinary residence, their telephone
number and their date of birth;
the name or names under which the applicant intends to carry on in
(iii)
the business; and
the address of the corporation to which the Issuer of Licences may
(iv)
send or deliver any notice or other document required or authorized
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 13 of 24
bylaw;
(b) if the applicant is a partnership:
a list containing the full name of each partner, the address of their
(i)
ordinary residence, their telephone number and their date of birth;
the name or names under which the applicant intends to carry on in
(ii)
the business; and
the address of the partnership to which the Issuer of Licences may
(iii)
send or deliver any notice or other document required or authorized
bylaw;
(c) if the applicant is an individual:
the name of the individual, the address of their ordinary residence,
(i)
their telephone number and their date of birth; and
the address of the individual to which the Issuer of Licences may send
(ii)
or deliver any notice or other document required or authorized by law.
13. When filing an application for a licence renewal, in addition to complying with the
General Provisions of this By-law, an applicant shall, at the time of making an
application:
(a) sign a form certifying that there are no changes to the information required
to be filed under the General Provisions or this Schedule;
if the applicant is a corporation, file every third year a copy of the last
(b)
information return filed for the corporation and any changes or corrections
to the information it contains; and
if the licence is an adult services entertainment establishment business
(c)
owner licence or a Class A adult video store licence, file every third year the
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 14 of 24
information respecting the owner of the location as set out under
subsections 15(b) and (c) for an adult services entertainment business
owner licence and under subsections 17(b) and (c) for a Class A adult video
store licence.
14. Every licence holder shall advise the Issuer of Licences immediately in writing of any
change to the information required to be filed in respect of their licence under the
General Provisions or this Schedule, provided that no licence holder shall change or
cause a change to be made to a floor plan without first obtaining the approval of the
Issuer of Licences.
Adult Services Entertainment Establishment
15. When filing an application for a licence, an applicant for an adult services
entertainment establishment business owner licence shall file:
(a) the municipal address of one location from which the business is to be
carried on and in respect of which a licence is sought;
(b) the name and address of the owner of the location as registered under the
Land Titles Act or the Registry Act;
(c) documentation demonstrating the applicant's right to possess or occupy the
location and if the applicant is not the owner of the location as registered
under the Land Tites Act or the Registry Act, the applicant shall file a copy of
a lease or other document constituting or affecting their legal relationship with
the owner of the location; and
(d) a detailed floor plan, drawn to scale, of the adult services entertainment
establishment that has been approved by the Issuer of Licences and the
details of such floor plan shall include but are not limited to depicting the
location of one main stage and of seating areas, offices, cloak rooms, disc
jockey areas, kitchen facilities, bar areas, dressing rooms, washrooms,
storage areas and entrances/exits.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 15 of 24
Adult Video Store
16. When filing an application for a licence, an applicant for an adult video store licence
shall file a detailed floor plan, drawn to scale, of the adult video store that has been
approved by the Issuer of Licences and the details of such floor plan shall include
but are not limited to depicting the location of entrances/exits to the adult video
store and, for a Class B adult video store licence, the location of and entrances/exits
to one adult video area.
Class A Adult Video Store
17. When filing an application for a licence, an applicant for a Class A adult video store
licence shall file:
(a) the municipal address of one location from which the business is to be
carried on and in respect of which a licence is sought;
(b) the name and address of the owner of the location as registered under the
Land Titles Act or the Registry Act; and
(c) documentation demonstrating the applicant's right to possess or occupy the
location and if the applicant is not the owner of the location as registered
under the Land Titles Act or the Registry Act, the applicant shall file a copy
of a lease or other document constituting or affecting their legal relationship
with the owner of the location.
EXPIRATION
Adult Entertainment Establishment
18. No licence issued under this Schedule is transferable.
19. Where:
(a) by a transfer of existing shares, by an issue of new or existing shares, or by
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 16 of 24
some other means, the controlling interest in a corporation holding a licence
is determined by the Issuer of Licences to have changed hands;
(b) one or more partner in a partnership holding a licence is determined by the
Issuer of Licences to have ceased to be a partner or the partnership is
determined by the Issuer of Licences to have ceased to exist,
a licence issued under this Schedule shall be deemed to have expired.
PART II: DUTIES OF LICENCE HOLDERS
Adult Entertainment Establishment
20. Every licence holder shall:
(a) produce their licence for inspection upon demand by a person assigned or
appointed by the Issuer of Licences to enforce this Schedule; and
(b) be civil in all dealings with the customers and members of the public.
Adult Services Entertainment Establishment
21. A business owner shall:
(a) not permit any person other than a licensed operator to operate the adult
services entertainment establishment;
not permit any person other than a licensed attendant to provide adult
(b)
services in the adult services entertainment establishment;
at all times when operating an adult services entertainment establishment,
(c)
carry on their person their photo identification card.
22. An operator shall not operate an adult services entertainment establishment unless:
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 17 of 24
(a) the business owner is licensed under this Schedule;
(b) they first notify the Issuer of Licences of the name of the business owner
whose adult services entertainment establishment they intend to operate;
(c) they have the business owner's name endorsed on their licence; and
at all times when operating an adult services entertainment establishment,
(d)
they carry on their person their photo identification card.
23. An adult services entertainment establishment business owner or operator shall:
Premises
(a) post their licence in a conspicuous place in the adult services entertainment
establishment at all times;
(b) post a copy of the approved floor plan at all public entrances/exits and in the
attendants' dressing rooms;
(c) keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition;
display no more than two signs on the exterior premises of the adult
(d)
services entertainment establishment that comply with paragraphs (d)(i) to
(v) inclusive:
the signs shall not exceed 0.3 square metres in area;
(i)
(ii) the signs shall be illuminated only by a non-flashing indirect or
interior means;
one of the signs shall be located over the street door or in the lower
(iii)
front window bearing only the words "Licensed Adult Entertainment
Establishment Licence - No. -", complete with the licence
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 18 of 24
number inserted;
(iv) one of the signs shall have a depth of not more than 7.6 centimetres
flat against a wall or door, bearing only the following information:
a. the business owner's name as shown on the licence;
b. the name, if any, under which the business owner carries on
business as endorsed on their licence;
c. the address of the adult services entertainment establishment;
d. the telephone number of the adult services entertainment
establishment;
the signs shall not include any other letters, marks, painting,
(v)
contrasting colours, symbol, logo, or any mark whatsoever;
(e) except as otherwise provided in this section, not advertise or use advertising
devices or permit any person to advertise or use advertising devices inside
or outside the premises, including but not limited to any printed matter, oral
or other communication or thing posted or distributed for the purpose of
promoting their adult services entertainment establishment or the adult
services provided therein;
(f) not carry on or permit the carrying on of the business unless the licensed
business owner or a licensed operator is present at the adult services
entertainment establishment;
(g) except where otherwise provided in this Schedule, close or cause to be
closed the adult services entertainment establishment at 2:00 a.m. and
remain closed until 8:00 a.m. every day when the adult services
entertainment establishment is open;
(h) post a sign in the attendants' dressing rooms, at all public entrances/exits
and in the washrooms that includes the following statements:
physical contact with the attendants is prohibited; and
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 19 of 24
sexually transmitted infections can be passed
on through
unprotected sexual contact
and that can be easily read by any person approaching;
Adult Services
retain the photo identification card of each attendant in their possession
(i)
during the term of employment of the attendant and post it in a conspicuous
place in the adult services entertainment establishment;
return each attendant's photo identification card to the attendant upon the
U)
termination of their employment;
not permit any person, other than a licensed attendant, to provide an adult
(k)
service in the adult services entertainment establishment;
(I) not permit an attendant, while providing adult services, to have physical
contact with another person's body, or another person to have physical
contact with an attendant;
(m) ensure that all adult services provided by an attendant are clearly visible
from the main stage, without obstruction or obscuration by any thing,
including but not limited to walls, curtains, glass, enclosures, structures, fog,
or inadequate lighting; and
(n) ensure that no adult services are visible from the exterior of the premises.
24. An attendant shall not:
(a) provide any adult services unless their photo identification card is posted
throughout the term of their employment as an attendant in a conspicuous
place in the adult services entertainment establishment;
(b) provide any adult services unless the business owner or the operator is
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 20 of 24
licensed as business owner or operator of the adult services entertainment
establishment;
during the provision of adult services, have physical contact with another
(c)
person's body, or permit another person to have physical contact with their
body;
provide adult services which are not clearly visible from the main stage,
(d)
without obstruction or obscuration by any thing, including but not limited to
walls, curtains, glass, enclosures, structures, fog, or inadequate lighting;
(e) provide any adult services that are visible from the exterior of the premises.
Adult Video Store
25. An adult video store licence holder shall:
(a) post their licence in a conspicuous place in the adult entertainment
establishment at all times;
(b) keep the premises in a clean and sanitary condition;
(c) not use exterior signs or advertisements for the store which use a pictorial
representation of a specified body area or a specified sexual activity;
advertise and carry on the business only under the name in which the
(d)
licence is issued, or such other name as provided to the Issuer of Licences
and endorsed on the licence;
(e) not permit the viewing of adult videos on the premises.
Class A Adult Video Store
26. In addition to complying with section 25, a Class A adult video store licence holder
shall:
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 21 of 24
(a) not permit any person under the age of eighteen years to enter or remain in
such store;
(b) not permit any employee under the age of eighteen years to work in such
store;
(c) post and keep posted at every public entrance/exit to the video store, and in
a prominent location inside such store, signs suffcient to indicate clearly to
any person approaching the store, and to every person in the store, that no
person under the age of eighteen years is permitted to enter or remain in
such store or any part of it; and
(e) display adult videos or adult video packaging which reveals a specified
body area or a specified sexual activity so that they may not be viewed by
any member of the public outside the premises;
Class B Adult Video Store
27. In addition to complying with section 25, a Class B adult video store licence holder
shall:
(a) display adult videos only in an adult video area;
(b) not permit any person under the age of eighteen years to enter or remain in
the adult video area;
not permit any employee under the age of eighteen years to work in the
( c)
adult video area;
(d) post at every public entrance/exit to the adult video area signs sufficient to
indicate clearly to any person approaching the adult video area that no
person under the age of eighteen years is permitted to enter or remain in
such adult video area;
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 22 of 24
(e) display adult videos or adult video packaging which reveals a specified
body area or a specified sexual activity so that they may not be viewed by
any member of the public outside the adult video area;
ensure that adult videos or adult video packaging which reveals a specified
(f)
body area or a specified sexual activity while being transported from the
adult video area to the cashier, if located outside the adult video area, are
enclosed in an opaque bag or other container so that they are not visible;
and
(g) inform any employees of the video store of the boundaries of the adult video
area and the requirement that persons under the age of eighteen years not
be allowed to enter or remain in the designated area.
PART IV: ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION
28. A person assigned or appointed by the Issuer of Licences to enforce this Schedule
may, at all reasonable times, inspect an adult entertainment establishment.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 23 of 24
APPENDIX B
SCHEDULE 13
PERSONAL AESTHETIC SERVICES
PART I: DEFINITIONS
1. In this Schedule:
(a) "personal aesthetic service" means a service provided for any part of the
human body where there is a risk of exposure to blood and includes, but is not
limited to, hairdressing, barbering, manicure, pedicure, tattooing, micro-
pigmentation, body-waxing, body-piercing and electrolysis services.
(b) A personal aesthetic service does not include medical or therapeutic treatment
a person otherwise duly qualified, licensed or registered so to do under
given by
the laws of the Province of Ontario.
PART II: LICENCE
2.(1 ) No person shall carry on a personal aesthetic service business without a licence.
Every person required to obtain a licence under this Schedule shall obtain a
(2)
separate licence in respect of each premises where a personal aesthetic service
business is carried on.
PART III: DUTIES OF LICENCE HOLDERS
3. Every person who carries on a personal aesthetic service business shall comply
with the "Ministry of Health Infection Control in Personal Services Settings Protocol",
January 1998, and the requirements of the Medical Officer of Health.
4. No person who carries on a personal aesthetic service business shall permit their
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
Page 24 of 24
employee or any person to provide a personal aesthetic service for a customer or
any person who they reasonably suspect has been exposed to or is suffering from a
communicable disease.
5. Every person who carries on a personal aesthetic service business shall keep the
personal aesthetic service business in a clean and sanitary condition to the
satisfaction of the Medical Officer of Health.
PART IV: ENFORCEMENT AND INSPECTION
6. A Public Health Inspector or a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer appointed under
any City by-law or any other person assigned or appointed by the Issuer of Licences
or the Medical Officer of Health may enforce the provisions of this Schedule and
may, at all reasonable times, inspect a personal aesthetic service business.



Content from 08285 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 25, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report; 08-024
CM: December 10,2008
Bill No. 285
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 08-285
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-17 0;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to By-law 07-17 0;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Paragraph 64(1)(0) of Schedule 25 is amended by deleting the words "an on-
board camera on or before November 29,2008"
2. This By-law comes into force on the date it is passed.
ENACTED AND PASSED this 10" day of December, 2008
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 08298 to amend bylaw no 03294 to establish site plan control in the city of hamiltonpdf:






Content from 08300 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272pdf:







Content from 08301 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026pdf:







Content from 08302 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:








Content from 08303 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:















Content from 09024 to amend bylaw no 07170 to license and regulate businessespdf:
Authority: Item 20, Economic Development
& Planning Committee
Report 09-002 (PED09030)
CM: January 28,2009
Bill No. 024
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-024
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various
businesses being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-1 70;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to the General
Provisions and Schedule 25 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-17 0;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 20(d) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 be amended by
deleting the words "This subsection takes effect on May 29, 2008." and
replacing them with the words "This subsection takes effect on February
12 , 2009."
This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 28'h day of January, 2009.
/Kevin C. Christenson
Mayor w City Clerk
.



Content from 09026 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-006
CM: February 11, 2009
Bil No. 026
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-026
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various
businesses being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to the General
Provisions and Schedule 25 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilon enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 20(d) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 be amended by
deleting the words "This subsection takes effect on February 12, 2008."
and replacing them with the words "This subsection takes effect on
September 30,2009."
This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 11th day of February, 2009.
/~~~) ,/-- --',
-="'~'1~~"~ (
'. -
Fred Eisenberger Kevin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09039 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 20, Economic Development
& Planning Committee
Report 09-002 (PED09030) CM:
January 28, 2009 AND
Item 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-006
CM: February 11, 2009
Bil No. 039
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-039
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various
businesses being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to the General
Provisions and Schedule 25 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilon enacts as follows:
1. the General Provisions of By-Law No. 07-170 is deleted
Section 4 of
and replaced with the following new section 4:
4.(1) The duties of the Issuer of Licences include ensuring:
(a) that applications are on the form applicable to the category of
licence applied for, complete, and signed by the applicant, or
where the application is from a partnership or corporation
respectively, signed by a partner or the president or other
authorized signing offcer of the corporation;
(b) that the applicant has paid the fees required for the applicable
licence(s) and application, for the term of the licence, prior to
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and
Regulate Various Businesses
Page 2 of 4
processing the application; and
(c) where a limited number of licences may be issued or transferred,
that there is a licence approved or available for issuance or
transfer.
(2)Where an application or applicant fails to comply with the
requirements of paragraphs (1)(a) or (b), or the Issuer of Licences'
instructions in that regard, or where no licences are available to be
issued or transferred under paragraph (1 )(c), the application shall
not be processed and shall be retumed to the applicant.
(3)Where the application is returned under subsection (2), the
applicant may be:
(i) given the application and advised personally; or
(ii) sent the application by regular mail to the applicant's address
as disclosed by the application or to their last known address
and advised by an accompanying letter.
(4)Where the Issuer of Licences has refused to issue a licence under
section 12 and the applicant or licensee has not appealed the
refusal in accordance with subsection 13(2), no further application
from the applicant or licensee for the same category of licence shall
be processed by the Issuer of Licences for one year from the date
of the refusaL. Any such further application shall be returned to the
applicant in accordance with subsection (3).
(5) Notwithstanding subsection (4), where the only reason for the
refusal is the failure of premises to meet one or more requirements
under this By-law, a further application may be processed if the
premises, whether they are the same or different premises, meet
all requirements under this By-law. Any such further application is
subject to all of the requirements under this By-law including the
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and
Regulate Various Businesses
Page 3 of 4
requirements under this section.
2. Section 3 of Schedule 13 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting the words "January, 1998" and replacing them with "2008, as
amended from time to time".
3. Subsection 20(d) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and
replaced with the following new subsection 20(d):
(d) unless:
(i) such person has undertaken and successfully completed
the service and skills training program prescribed by the
Issuer of Licences under subsection 15(a). Where the
person is a corporation, the person holding shares carrying
at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of the voting rights attached
to all shares of the corporation for the time being issued and
outstanding shall have undertaken and successfully
completed the service and skils training program prescribed
by the Issuer of Licences under subsection 15(a);
if no one person holds at least fifty-one percent (51 %) of
(ii)
the voting rights of the corporation, then the minority
shareholder, holding the greatest percentage of the voting
rights attached to all shares of the corporation for the time
being issued and outstanding, shall have undertaken and
successfully completed the service and skills training
program prescribed by the Issuer of Licences under
subsection 15(a). Where among the minority
shareholders there are more than one minority
shareholder holding the greatest percentage of the voting
rights attached to all shares of the corporation for the time
being issued and outstanding, the corporation shall
designate the minority shareholder among such group
who shall have undertaken and successfully completed
the service and skils training program prescribed by the
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and
Regulate Various Businesses
Page 4 of 4
Issuer of Licences under subsection 15(a) of this
Schedule.
This subsection takes effect on September 30, 2009.
(iii)
The successful completion of the service and skils training program
under this subsection shall be determined in accordance with
section 19.
4. Subsection 46(7) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted
and replaced with the following new subsection 46(7):
(7) The purchase of the controllng interest of a corporation which
holds a taxicab owner's licence by any person shall be deemed
a transfer of the taxicab owner's licence, provided that such
transfer shall be carried out in compliance with requirements of
this Schedule and shall not be effective until approved by the
Issuer of Licences.
5. That By-laws 09-024 and 09-026 both be repealed.
6. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 25th day of February, 2009
~s:
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09040 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 7, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report: 09-005 (PED09053)
CM: February 25,2009
Bill No. 040
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-040
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-1 70;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for amendments to the General Provisions and
Schedule 25 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Section 5 of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
adding the following new subsections after subsection (3):
(4) A person issued more than one licence under this By-law for the same
premises at the same time shall only be required to pay the fee for the
licence with the highest fee.
(5) A person holding a current and valid licence under this By-law who is
issued a further licence for the same premises shall only be required
to pay the administration portion of the fee plus any inspection fee for
the further licence.
(6) Notwithstanding subsections (4) and (5), a person issued a Tobacco
Retailer licence under Schedule 27 of this By-law shall be required,
under all circumstances, to the pay the fee for that licence.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and
Regulate Various Businesses
Page 2 of 2
2. Subsection 2(3) of Schedule 16 is deleted.
3. Subsection 2(2) of Schedule 21 is deleted and subsection 2(1) of Schedule 21
is renumbered as section 2.
4. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
c
PASSED and ENACTED this 25th day of February, 2009.
Kevin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09058 to amend bylaw no 07170  a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 18, Economic Development
and Planning Committee Report
Report 09-007 (PED09089)
1, 2009
CM: April
Bil No. 058
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-058
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various
businesses being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for an amendment to the General
Provisions and Schedule 25 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Appendix 3 of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced
with the new Appendix 3, entitled "Taxicab Priority List", attached as
Appendix A to this By-law.
2. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 1st day of April, 2009.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate
Various Businesses
Page 1 of 2
Appendix A to By-law No. 09-058
TAXICAB PRIORITY LIST
NO. APPl DATE FIRST NAME LAST NAME
1 18-May-79 W ALiD CHAFIC
2 23-May-79 HANNIBAL RIZZUTO
3 05-Jul-79 STAN KROK
4 15-Aug-79 ADNAN SHEHADEH
5 11-Sep-79 SHARON BELLAMY
6 01-0et-79 DANIEL L. BERNIER
7 05-0et-79 LORRAINE MOONEY
8 30-0et-79 WILLIAM J. PERKINS
9 09-Nov-79 LARRY ROBERGE
10 14-Nov-79 ROGER FRANCOEUR
11 12-Feb-80 MARC STUART HATHAWAY
12 14-Feb-80 YOGINDER K. SHARMA
13 27-Feb-80 ADELIA BALICE
14 28-Feb-80 COSIMO BALICE
15 14-Jul-80 ANTHONY PAUL DICICCIO
16 06-0et-80 GURDIP S. SOOR
17 05-Dee-80 MOHAMMAD AHMED
18 22-Dee-80 KALOUST KALOUSTIAN
19 23-Dee-80 ROBERT KOCZERZT
20 24-Dee-80 SOLOMON MARCELLIN
21 22-Apr-81 JOHN WEISS
22 30-Apr -81 SHIRLEY HATHAWAY
23 06-Aug-81 DANIEL VELTRI
24 26-0et-81 STEPHEN JONES
25 24-Nov-81 WAYNE STEWART MCGREGOR
26 28-Jan-82 ANTHONY F. RIZZUTO
27 08-Feb-82 DRAGO BASIC
28 26-Feb-82 JOHN C. MACDONALD
29 18-Mar-82 THEODORS TOMA
30 05-Apr-82 PUTRUS ISAK
31 14-Apr -82 JOGINDAR SINGH DHALIWAL
32 08-Jun-82 KEITH JOHNSON
33 24-Jun-82 WILLIAM KHAMMO
34 21-Jul-82 THOMAS F. SEBISTY
35 18-0et-82 HARBANS SINGH KALSI
36 01-Nov-82 MARK
GRAN BY
37 08-Nov-82 WILLIAM G. ROMANS
38 09-Jun-83 SANDRA FUKUMOTO
39 04-Jul-83 DANE HATHAWAY
40 19-5ep-83 BRENDA ROBERGE
41 03-0et-84 COLLETTE ROBERGE
42 14-Dee-84 ZERE TEWOLDE
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate
Various Businesses
Page 2 of 2
43 19-Dee-84 MICHAEL ROTH
44 26-Feb-85 MOHAMMAD NAEEM KHAN
45 16-Jan-86 LEONARD ROBERGE
NO. APPl DATE FIRST NAME LAST NAME
46 03-Jul-86 DENISE GEORGIAN
47 05-Aug-86 SHABIR AHMED
48 05-Sep-86 HABTE-AB TECHLE-MARIAM
49 29-Dee-86 ANTHONY R. RIZZUTO
50 29-Dee-86 SHAHID BUTT
51 05-Jan-87 BASHARA T BUTT
52 09-Jan-87 ERIC SHEPHERD
53 23-Jun-87 VALENTINO DALBELLO
54 23-Jun-87 MARIA DALBELLO
55 21-Dee-87 JOSEPH VARGA
56 05-Jan-88 FREDERICK J. MULDOON
57 13-Jan-88 JAGIR MUL T ANI
58 29-Jan-88 MOHAMMAD FAROOQ
59 31-Mar-88 BRIAN COSGROVE
60 28-Jun-88 RODGER MCEACHERN
61 07 -Aug-88 RONALD AIRTH
62 06-Sep-88 CLAUDIO BALICE
63 19-5ep-88 GHULAM N. BUTT
64 27 -Sep-88 WILLIAM ROMANS
65 11-Jan-89 BRENT J. DAWSON
66 24-Jan-89 JERRY ZARASKI
67 13-Jul-89 JOSEPHINE RIZZUTO
68 26-Jul-89 PETER RIHBANY
69 31-Aug-90 GAIL RIZZUTO-DOWLING
70 20-Feb-91 RONALD ROBERGE
71 17-Apr-91 TOKUNBO (DAVE) OGUNLADE
72 03-Jan-92 JAGT AR SINGH CHAHAL
73 04-Sep-92 ANGELA RIZZUTO-ECKLUND



Content from 09067 solid waste management bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 8, Public Works Committee
Report 09-005 (PW09021)
CM: April 1, 2009
Bill No. 067
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-067
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT BY-LAW
Being a By-Law to provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the
City of Hamilton
WHEREAS Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, Chapter 25 (the
“Municipal Act, 2001”) authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or
desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 4, 5, 6 and 7 of
subsection 10(2) authorize by-laws respecting public assets of the municipality, the
economic social and environmental well-being of the municipality, the health, safety and
well-being of persons and the provision of any service or thing that it considers
necessary or desirable for the public;
AND WHEREAS the Waste Management System approved by the Council of the City
of Hamilton includes the regulation and provision for the diversion, collection,
processing and disposal of Acceptable Waste originating within the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS Section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton
to pass by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of
Hamilton passed under that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton,
amongst other things, to delegate its authority and to impose fees or charges on person
for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of it;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
PART 1.0 DEFINITIONS
1.1 In this By-Law:
(a) “Acceptable Waste” means Waste that is acceptable at Transfer Stations
and Community Recycling Centres, namely:
(i) Bulk Waste;
(ii) clean wood less than 1.2 metres long and broken down wooden
crates, excluding pressure treated wood and railway ties;
(iii) Garbage;
(iv) Household Hazardous Waste;
(v) Leaf and Yard Waste;
(vi) Recyclable Materials;
(vii) Scrap Metal;
(viii) tires and tire rims (from cars and small pick ups);
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 2 of 32
(ix) waste electrical and electronic equipment as defined in O. Reg.
393/04 under the Waste Diversion Act, 2002; and
(x) White Goods;
(b) "Bin Container" means a receptacle manufactured for the deposit of Waste
which is made of metal or plastic with a secure cover and is capable of
being emptied by a forklift packer truck;
(c) “Bulk Waste” means large household items, including but not limited to:
(i) carpet;
(ii) clean wood less than 1.2 metres long and broken down wooden
crates, excluding pressure treated wood and railway ties;
(iii) computers;
(iv) discarded plumbing, sinks, toilet bowls and seats, fittings and pipe;
(v) floor lamps;
(vi) furniture, mattresses and bed springs:
(vii) metal weighing less than 23 kilograms;
(viii) pool filters;
(ix) pool pumps;
(x) pool covers and solar blankets;
(xi) televisions; and
(xii) tires without rims;
(d) “Central Composting Facility” means a Facility for the receipt, processing
and marketing of Organic Waste, which is not accessible to the public;
(e) “City” means the geographical area of the City of Hamilton or the municipal
corporation as the context requires;
(f) “City Landfill Site” means the landfill site of the City located in the former
Township of Glanbrook in the Province of Ontario composed of part of Lots
26, 27 and 28, Concession 9, in the Geographic Township of Binbrook, and
being more particularly described as Part 4 according to a Reference Plan
received and deposited in the Land Registry Office for the Registry Division
of Wentworth as Plan No. 62R-5286;
(g) “Collection Operator” means staff retained to collect, remove and transport
Waste, whether employed by a Contractor or directly by the City;
(h) “Collection Day” means the specific days of the week and/or dates for the
collection of Waste, prescribed by notice given by the City to Owners and
Occupants of Eligible Properties;
(i) “Commercial Vehicle” means a vehicle operated for the transport of Waste
by or in association with any commercial, industrial or institutional activity
and includes any vehicle with commercial markings, a commercial
registration or an increased carrying capacity such as a dump trailer but
does not include a vehicle operated by a driver who produces his or her
Farmer ID card issued by the Ontario Federation of Agriculture, the
Christian Farmers Federation of Ontario or the National Farmers Union;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 3 of 32
(j) “Community Recycling Centre” means a Facility for the receipt and transfer
of Waste where residents of the City may drop off Acceptable Waste;
(k) “Container” means a receptacle for the purpose of depositing Waste and
includes a Bin Container;
(l) “Contractor" means a private company under contract with the City to collect,
transfer or process Waste, or to operate a Facility, or any combination of the
foregoing;
(m) “Council” means the Council of the City as elected from time to time;
(n) “Eligible Property” means:
(i) single detached dwellings and multiple dwellings with a maximum of 5
dwelling units, including street townhouse dwellings and excluding
block townhouse complexes;
(ii) multiple dwellings with 6 or more dwelling units, including block
townhouse complexes and trailer parks;
(iii) other residential property, including lodging houses and residential care
facilities in residential neighbourhoods;
(iv) commercial properties, excluding commercial properties with four or
more floors, regional shopping centres, community shopping centres,
neighbourhood shopping centres and strip malls;
(v) places of worship, except uses that are accessory or ancillary to the
place of worship;
(vi) elementary and secondary schools, for the collection of Organic Waste
and Recyclable Materials only;
and each term for a built form or use in this subsection is deemed to include
similar terms, such as “single detached dwelling” including “single family
dwelling”, that have been, are or may be used to describe such built form or
use;
(o) "Facility" means a City-owned property used for the transfer, processing or
disposal of Waste, or any combination of the foregoing, as set out Schedule
“A”;
(p) “Garbage” means discarded material other than:
(i) Bulk Waste;
(ii) Hazardous Waste;
(iii) Household Hazardous Waste;
(iv) Leaf and Yard Waste;
(v) Liquid Waste;
(vi) Organic Waste (where Organic Waste is not collected by a Collection
Operator);
(vii) Pathological Waste;
(viii) Recyclable Materials; and
(ix) White Goods;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 4 of 32
(q) "General Manager” means the General Manager of Public Works for the
City of Hamilton or his or her duly appointed designate, or successor;
(r) “Hazardous Waste” means:
(i) 1. hazardous industrial waste;
2. acute hazardous waste chemical;
3. hazardous waste chemical;
4. severely toxic waste;
5. ignitable waste;
6. corrosive waste;
7. reactive waste;
8. radioactive waste, except radioisotope wastes disposed of in a
landfilling site in accordance with the written instructions of the
Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission;
9. pathological waste; or
10. leachate toxic waste,
all as defined in Reg. 347 under the Environmental Protection Act;
(ii) explosive waste;
(iii) PCB waste as defined in Reg. 362, R.R.O. 1990 under the
Environmental Protection Act,
and includes a mixture of acute hazardous waste, chemical hazardous waste,
chemical hazardous industrial waste, pathological waste, radioactive waste or
severely toxic waste and any other waste or material, and any other waste
identified as a hazardous waste in any Provincial or Federal statute,
regulation, Order in Council or otherwise from time to time;
(s) “Home Health Care Waste” means:
(i) casts;
(ii) catheters;
(iii) disposable pads, gloves and masks;
(iv) dialysis wastes such as tubing, filters, disposable towels and sheets;
(v) empty and rinsed out colostomy bags;
(vi) gastric and nasal tubes;
(vii) IV bags and tubing;
(viii) soiled dressings and incontinence products; and
(ix) sponges;
that are not Pathological Waste;
(t) “Household Hazardous Waste” means any household product, material or
item labelled as “corrosive”, “toxic”, “reactive”, “explosive” or “flammable”,
and which is accepted under the City’s household hazardous waste
program, if any, in effect from time to time including:
(i) aerosols;
(ii) antifreeze;
(iii) asbestos;
(iv) bulked fuel;
(v) car/vehicle batteries;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 5 of 32
(vi) dry-cell batteries;
(vii) fire extinguishers;
(viii) flammable liquids;
(ix) flammable solids;
(x) fluorescent light bulbs;
(xi) halogenated pesticides;
(xii) ignitable gas cylinders;
(xiii) inorganic acids;
(xiv) inorganic bases;
(xv) inorganic cyanides;
(xvi) inorganic oxidizers;
(xvii) isocyanates;
(xviii) large propane tanks;
(xix) mercury switches;
(xx) non-basic fire suppressants;
(xxi) non-ignitable gas cylinders;
(xxii) non-PCB light ballasts;
(xxiii) non-halogenated pesticides;
(xxiv) oil;
(xxv) oil filters;
(xxvi) organic oxidizers;
(xxvii) paint;
(xxviii) paint sludge;
(xxix) PCB contaminated waste;
(xxx) PCB light ballasts;
(xxxi) pharmaceuticals; and
(xxxii) small gas cylinders;
(u) “Household Pet Waste” means animal excrement generated by a
domesticated animal that is not living on a farm;
(v) “Ineligible Property” means any property within the City that is not defined
as an Eligible Property in subsection (n);
(w) “Leaf and Yard Waste” means leaves, grass, weeds, garden hedge and
tree trimmings, branches, brush, house and garden plants;
(x) “Liquid Waste” means Waste which is not solid and which exhibits evidence
of free water, or other liquids, whether or not contained;
(y) “Materials Recycling Facility” means a Facility for the receipt, processing
and marketing of Recyclable Materials, which is not accessible to the
public;
(z) “Municipal Law Enforcement Officer” means any person appointed by
Council for the enforcement of this By-Law or any other by-law;
(aa) “Occupant” means any person over the age of eighteen years in
possession of property which is subject to this By-Law;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 6 of 32
(bb) “Organic Waste” means animal and vegetable waste, excluding Household
Pet Waste and including, but not limited to, the following kitchen, yard and
other source separated organic waste materials:
(i) baked goods, bone, coffee filters and grounds, tea bags, dairy
products, eggs, grains, meat, fish, poultry, pasta, vegetables, fruits,
peelings and nut shells;
(ii) Leaf and Yard Waste, grass clippings, plants, leaves, flowers and
vegetable garden waste;
(iii) soiled newsprint, paper bags, greasy pizza boxes, paper towels and
microwave popcorn bags;
(cc) “Owner” includes, but is not limited to:
(i) both the owner in trust and the beneficial owner of property which is
subject to this By-Law;
(ii) the person for the time being managing or receiving the rent of the
property, which is subject to this By-Law, in connection with which the
word is used, whether on the person’s own account or as agent or
trustee of any other person or who would receive the rent if the property
was let; and
(iii) a lessee or occupant of the property who manages or controls the
condition of the property, which is subject to this By-Law;
(dd) “Pathological Waste” means:
(i) bandages, dressings, drugs, medicines, needles, poultices, syringes,
vaccines, vials and other similar materials or substances which contain
or could reasonably be expected to contain pathogenic bacteria or
micro-organisms or could reasonably be expected to be infectious,
hazardous or dangerous; and
(ii) anything designated as pathological waste by O. Reg. 347 under the
Environmental Protection Act;
(ee) “Physical Constraints Exemption” means a situation on a property which
results in inadequate space for the placement of Bin Containers and/or for
Waste collection vehicles to enter the property and remove the Waste from
the Bin Containers in a safe manner, as determined by the General
Manager;
(ff) “Private Hauler” means an individual or corporation in the business of
transporting Waste to a Facility including Residential Vehicles and
Commercial Vehicles, except while operating such vehicles under contract
to the City;
(gg) “Recyclable Materials” means Recyclable Containers and Recyclable
Fibres, including:
1) Recyclable Containers
(i) aseptic containers (e.g. drinking boxes);
(ii) empty metal paint and aerosol cans;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 7 of 32
(iii) gable-top containers (e.g. juice and milk cartons);
(iv) glass bottles and jars;
(v) metal beverage and food containers;
(vi) plastic bottles and jugs (high density polyethylene #2);
(vii) plastic soft drink and water containers (polyethylene
terephthalate #1);
(viii) film plastic (e.g. grocery bags);
(ix) tubs and lids (#5);
(x) polystyrene and styrofoam containers (#6); and
(xi) cardboard cans (e.g. frozen juice containers, potato chip
containers);
and
2) Recyclable Fibres
(i) boxboard (e.g. cereal and cracker boxes);
(ii) corrugated cardboard;
(iii) envelopes, direct mail advertising, paper egg cartons, greeting
cards and all remaining paper and paper products generated by
households (currently referred to as the “paper box concept”);
(iv) fine paper;
(v) magazines;
(vi) newsprint; and
(vii) telephone books;
(hh) “Residential Vehicle” means a private vehicle for personal use not normally
used for purposes of Waste haulage associated with a commercial, industrial
or institutional activity and includes a vehicle operated by a driver who
produces his or her Farmer ID card issued by the Ontario Federation of
Agriculture, the Christian Farmers Federation of Ontario or the National
Farmers Union;
(ii) “Scrap Metal” includes but is not limited to:
(i) metal bicycles;
(ii) metal bed frames;
(iii) metal fencing/posts;
(iv) metal filing cabinets;
(v) hot water tanks;
(vi) metal sinks;
(vii) nuts/bolts/nails/screws;
(viii) passenger vehicle tire rims;
(ix) metal desks;
(x) metal shelves;
(xi) metal lawnmowers;
(xii) metal no longer than 1.8 metres in length;
(xiii) aluminium siding;
(xiv) automotive parts;
(xv) pipe fittings; and
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 8 of 32
(xvi) barbeques excluding propane tanks;
(jj) “Special Policy Area” means a downtown core area and/or a Business
Improvement Area, including but not limited to:
(i) Hamilton District - Queen Street to Wellington Street and Cannon
Street to King Street, and along the spine of James Street from
Aberdeen Avenue to Guise Street;
(ii) Stoney Creek District - King Street from New Mountain Road to
Battlefield Drive; Lake Avenue South;
(iii) Ancaster District - Wilson Street from Rosseaux/Mohawk Road to
Todd Street;
(iv) Dundas District - King Street from York Street to Bond Street;
(v) Flamborough District - Dundas Street East from Perrelli Street to
Pamela Street and Hamilton Street North from Dundas Street to
Parkside Drive;
(kk) “Street” means a common and public highway, street, avenue, parkway,
driveway, square, place, bridge, viaduct or trestle, any part of which is
intended for or used by the general public for the passage of vehicles and
includes the area between lateral property lines thereof;
(ll) “Transfer Station” means a Facility for the receipt and transfer of Waste,
and may include one or more areas accessible to the public;
(mm) “Unacceptable Bulk Waste” means:
(i) automotive parts;
(ii) construction materials, including but not limited to drywall, electrical
wiring and various other home renovation materials;
(iii) earth, brick and stone;
(iv) Garbage and Unacceptable Garbage;
(v) Household Hazardous Waste;
(vi) Items weighing more than 90 kilograms;
(vii) Leaf and Yard Waste;
(viii) loose carpets;
(ix) Organic Waste;
(x) pipes and swing sets exceeding 1.2 metres in length;
(xi) pressure treated lumber, railway ties and painted/stained wood;
(xii) Recyclable Materials;
(xiii) rolled and tied carpets longer than 1.2 metres in length;
(xiv) Scrap Metal;
(xv) steel and plastic barrels;
(xvi) tires with rims;
(xvii) tree stumps;
(xviii) wheel rims;
(xix) White Goods;
(xx) wood in excess of 1.2 metres in length;
(nn) “Unacceptable Garbage” means:
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 9 of 32
(i) automotive parts:
(ii) Bulk Waste and Unacceptable Bulk Waste;
(iii) carcasses of dogs, cats, fowl and other creatures or part thereof which
are not Organic Waste;
(iv) earth, brick and stone;
(v) hay and straw;
(vi) Hazardous Waste;
(vii) Household Hazardous Waste;
(viii) human and animal excrement, except for Household Pet Waste and
diapers;
(ix) industrial, commercial and trade Waste from Ineligible Properties;
(x) Leaf and Yard Waste;
(xi) Liquid Waste;
(xii) Organic Waste, where Organic Waste is collected by a Collection
Operator;
(xiii) Pathological Waste;
(xiv) Recyclable Materials;
(xv) sawdust, shavings, excelsior and vermiculite;
(xvi) steel and plastic barrels;
(xvii) wood in excess of 1.2 metres in length, wooden boxes and barrels;
(xviii) wire, wire mesh and fencing; or
(xix) White Goods;
(xx) tree stumps;
(xxi) pressure treated lumber, railway ties;
(xxii) wood ashes;
(xxiii) metal;
(xxiv) Scrap Metal;
(oo) “Unacceptable Organic Waste” means:
(i) animal carcasses;
(ii) batteries;
(iii) Bulk Waste;
(iv) diapers;
(v) dirt/sod;
(vi) dryer sheets;
(vii) electronic and electrical equipment;
(viii) Garbage;
(ix) glass jars/containers and lids;
(x) Home Health Care Waste;
(xi) Household Hazardous Waste;
(xii) Household Pet Waste;
(xiii) metal;
(xiv) Pathological Waste;
(xv) plastic bags;
(xvi) plastic containers;
(xvii) plastic plates/cutlery;
(xviii) rocks;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 10 of 32
(xix) sanitary products;
(xx) Scrap Metal;
(xxi) styrofoam;
(xxii) textiles/clothing/twine;
(xxiii) tree stumps;
(xxiv) White Goods;
(xxv) wood, except untreated wood that is sawdust, cold ashes in a paper
bag or wood chips;
(pp) “Waste” means Bulk Waste, Garbage, Hazardous Waste, Household
Hazardous Waste, Leaf and Yard Waste, Liquid Waste, Organic Waste,
Pathological Waste, Recyclable Materials and White Goods;
(qq) “Waste Management System” means Facilities and equipment used in and
operations carried out for the management of Waste by the City including but
not limited to the planning, collection, handling, transportation, storage,
processing, marketing and/or disposal; and may also include Waste diversion
programs; and
(rr) “White Goods” means:
(i) air conditioners, window mounted and central air systems;
(ii) clothes dryers;
(iii) dehumidifiers;
(iv) dishwashers;
(v) freezers;
(vi) hot water tanks, drained;
(vii) microwave ovens;
(viii) metal, weighing 23 kilograms or more;
(ix) ovens;
(x) pool heaters;
(xi) refrigerators;
(xii) stoves;
(xiii) water pressure tanks; and
(xiv) water coolers.
PART 2.0 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION
2.1 The provisions of this By-Law apply to all properties within the boundaries of the
City.
2.2 Unless otherwise provided for, Waste collection and disposal services, as set out
under this By-Law, are provided only to Eligible Properties within the City.
2.2 If a property is an Ineligible Property for Waste collection and disposal services
from the City under this By-Law, the Owner or Occupant shall be fully
responsible for the provision of private Waste collection and disposal services, in
accordance with good practice and all applicable statutes, by-laws and
regulations respecting health and safety.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 11 of 32
2.3 In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this By-Law and the
provisions of any other statute, regulation or by-law, the provisions that are the
most restrictive prevail.
2.4 The necessary grammatical changes required to make the provisions of this By-
Law applicable to corporations, partnerships, trusts, and individuals, male or
female, and to include the singular or plural meaning where the context so
requires, shall in all cases be assumed as though fully expressed.
2.5 The following Schedules are attached to and form part of this By-Law:
Schedule “A” - Facilities;
Schedule “B” - Metric to Imperial Measurement Conversions;
Schedule “C” - Fees.
2.6 The insertion of headings and the division of this By-Law into sections and
subsections are for convenience of reference only and shall not affect the
interpretation thereof.
2.7 Any references in this By-Law to any statutes, regulations or by-laws shall be
deemed to be a reference to such statutes, regulations or by-laws, as amended,
restated or replaced from time to time.
PART 3.0 SHORT TITLE
This By-Law may be referred to as the “Solid Waste Management By-Law”.
PART 4.0 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
4.1 Administration and Enforcement
(a) The General Manager is responsible for the administration of this By-Law.
(b) All Municipal Law Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce this By-
Law.
(c) The General Manager is authorized to delegate the responsibility for the
administration of this By-Law to any employee or agent of the Waste
Management Division of the Public Works Department of the City.
(d) Fees under this By-Law, including but not limited to fees for Waste
disposal, shall be as set out in this By-Law and the City’s User Fees and
Charges By-Law.
(e) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may enter on land at any reasonable
time for the purpose of carrying out an inspection to determine whether or
not the following are being complied with:
(i) this By-Law;
(ii) a direction or order made under this By-Law;
(iii) a condition of a permit issued under this By-Law; or
(iv) an order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
(f) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may, for the purposes of the
inspection under subsection (e):
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 12 of 32
(i) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant
to the inspection;
(ii) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection
for the purpose of making copies or extracts;
(iii) require information in writing or otherwise as required by the
Municipal Law Enforcement Officer from any person concerning a
matter related to the inspection; and
(iv) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert
knowledge, make examinations or take tests, samples or
photographs necessary for the purposes of the inspection.
(g) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may undertake an inspection
pursuant to an order issued by a provincial judge or justice of the peace
under section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001 where he or she has been
prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying out an inspection under
subsections (e) and (f).
(h) If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a contravention of
this By-Law has occurred, he or she may make an order requiring the
person who contravened the By-Law or who caused or permitted the
contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the
contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening activity.
(i) An order under subsection (h) shall set out:
(i) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of the property on which the
contravention occurred; and
(ii) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
(j) If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a contravention of
this By-law has occurred, he or she may make an order requiring the
person who contravened the By-law or who caused or permitted the
contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the
contravention occurred to do work to correct the contravention.
(k) An order under subsection (j) shall set out:
(i) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of property on which the contravention
occurred;
(ii) the work to be completed; and
(iii) the date or dates by which the work must be complete.
(l) An order to discontinue contravening activity made under subsection (i) or
an order to do work made under subsection (j) may be served personally or
by registered mail to the last known address of:
(i) the owner or occupier of the property where the contravention
occurred; and
(ii) such other persons affected by the order as the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer making the order determines.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 13 of 32
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place five
business days after the date of mailing.
(m) In addition to service given in accordance with subsection (l), an order to
discontinue contravening activity made under subsection (i) or an order to
do work made under subsection (j) may be served by a Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer placing a placard containing the order in a
conspicuous place on the property where the contravention occurred.
(n) Where service cannot be given in accordance with subsection (l), sufficient
service is deemed to have taken place when given in accordance with
subsection (m).
(o) Where a person does not comply with a direction or a requirement,
including an order, under this By-Law to do a matter or thing, the General
Manager, with such assistance by others as may be required, may carry out
such direction or requirement at the person’s expense.
(p) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection
(o) by action or by adding the costs to the tax roll and collecting them in the
same manner as property taxes and such costs shall include an interest
rate of 15 per cent commencing on the day the City incurs the costs and
ending on the day the costs, including the interest, are paid in full.
(q) The General Manager is authorized to give immediate effect to any
direction or requirement where the costs of carrying out the direction or
requirement do not exceed $10,000 and, where the costs do exceed
$10,000, as the City’s Council may authorize.
(r) The City may retain a Contractor to fulfill any of the City’s responsibilities
under this By-Law, however if due to breakdown of equipment, strike,
inclement weather, or any other cause, Waste collection is not provided to a
property, the City is not be liable to any person for any damages, costs or
expenses due to the failure of such Waste collection to take place. If the
City changes a Waste Collection Day, the City may advise all affected
persons by notice in the local newspapers published three times prior to the
change or by such other method approved by the General Manager.
4.2 Prohibition Order
(c) Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the
conviction has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction
thereafter may, in addition to any other remedy and to any penalty imposed
by this By-Law, make an order prohibiting the continuation or repetition of
the offence by the person convicted.
4.3 Penalties
(a) Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-Law is, upon
conviction, guilty of an offence and is liable:
(i) on a first conviction, to a fine of not more $10,000; and
(ii) on any subsequent conviction, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 14 of 32
(b) Despite subsection (a), where the person convicted is a corporation,
(i) the maximum fine in paragraph (a)(i) is $50,000; and
(ii) the maximum fine in paragraph (a)(ii) is $100,000.
PART 5.0 SEVERABILITY
Where a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or part of a section
of this By-Law invalid, the remainder of this By-Law shall continue in force unless
the court makes an order to the contrary.
PART 6.0 PROHIBITIONS
In addition to the prohibitions on specific types of Waste, as defined in this By-
Law, the following general provisions shall apply:
6.1 No person shall set out for collection, or allow, acquiesce in or cause to be set
out for collection, by a Collection Operator, any Unacceptable Garbage.
6.2 No Owner whose property is vacant shall set out for collection, or allow,
acquiesce in or cause to be set out for collection, by a Collection Operator, any
Waste on said vacant property.
6.3 No person shall deposit, or allow, acquiesce in or cause any other person to
deposit, any Waste on or onto any Street or public property. For the purpose of
this section, “deposit” shall include place, drop, sweep, throw, or cast.
6.4 No Owner or Occupant shall set out Waste for collection, or allow, acquiesce in
or cause Waste to be set out for collection, by a Collection Operator, prior to 7:00
p.m. of the day prior to the scheduled Collection Day and after 7:00 a.m. of the
scheduled Collection Day.
6.5 No Owner or Occupant shall fail to remove any Container, whether empty or not,
from the Street by 7:00 p.m. on the scheduled Collection Day.
6.6 No Owner or Occupant shall allow, acquiesce in or cause the accumulation or
storage of Waste on his or her property so that it becomes a public nuisance or
emits offensive odours or is likely to attract birds, rats or other vermin or insects.
6.7 No Owner or Occupant shall allow, acquiesce in or cause any Container to emit
offensive odours or attract birds, rats or other vermin and insects.
6.8 No person shall pick over, interfere with, disturb, remove or scatter, or allow,
acquiesce in or cause any Waste set out for collection to be picked over,
interfered with, disturbed, removed or scattered unless authorized to do so by the
General Manager.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 15 of 32
6.9 No person shall allow any animal owned or under his or her care or control to
pick over, interfere with, disturb, remove or scatter any Waste set out for
collection.
6.10 No person shall set out, or allow, acquiesce in or cause Waste to be set out on
the Street or public property for collection by a private agency, unless authorized
to do so by the General Manager.
6.11 No person shall deposit, or allow, acquiesce in or cause to be deposited Waste
generated on private property in Containers located on public property for the
purpose of depositing Waste generated on public property.
6.12 No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or allow, acquiesce in or cause
to be set out for collection, Waste generated on his or her property onto any
other person’s property, or onto the Street abutting any other person’s property,
without the prior consent of that other person.
6.13 No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or allow, acquiesce in or cause
to be set out for collection, any Waste unless it is in an acceptable Container, as
prescribed in Section 8.
6.14 No person shall collect Waste unless he or she has the necessary licenses and
complies with all relevant Federal, Provincial and municipal statutes, regulations
and by-laws.
6.15 No person shall fail to pay an applicable fee as set out under this By-law or the
User Fees and Charges By-law.
6.16 No person shall smoke at a Facility or hold a lighted tobacco product, including a
cigarette, cigar or pipe, at a Facility.
PART 7.0 AUTHORITY OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
7.1 The General Manager has authority to:
(a) operate and administer the Facilities in accordance with this By-Law;
(b) determine frequency and scheduling of Waste collection services, in
accordance this By-Law;
(c) designate Waste collection points;
(d) discontinue or refuse Waste collection services to any Owner or Occupant
whose property, in the opinion of the General Manager, is unsafe for entry
or egress by Collection Operators for any reason, including but not limited
to, the physical layout, loading facilities or the methods of handling Waste
on the property;
(e) suspend Waste collection services in all or part of the City, in the event of
inclement weather or other condition that in the opinion of the General
Manager renders the provision of Waste collection services unsafe or
otherwise undeliverable;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 16 of 32
(f) establish site specific Waste collection conditions for properties which have
Physical Constraint Exemptions;
(g) give approval for more Containers than otherwise permitted under this By-
Law to be set out for collection, taking into consideration: the medical
circumstances of the occupant(s) of residential property; if 3 or more of the
occupants of residential property are children under the age of 5; the use of
the property as a farm; the use of the property as a daycare as proven by a
Provincial licence, income tax return or other similar documentation; or
such other special considerations as may be approved by Council from time
to time; and
(h) establish such other measures required for the proper administration of the
Waste Management System.
7.2 With regard to operations at a Facility, the General Manager may:
(a) refuse entry to any person violating this By-law;
(b) evaluate and certify the acceptability for disposal of any Waste not specifically
dealt with in this By-law, in a manner consistent with this By-law, upon
receiving a written request by any person proposing to deposit Waste at a
Facility;
(c) specify an acceptable time schedule, and pre-disposal conditions for the
delivery of Waste which might otherwise cause undue operational difficulties
at a Facility; or
(d) refuse entry to all vehicles which exceed their licensed weight capacity.
PART 8.0 COLLECTION SERVICES
8.1 General Conditions for Waste Collection
(a) Subject to this By-Law, Waste is only collected from Eligible Properties.
(b) Except as authorized by the General Manager, no person shall remove
Recyclable Materials or other Waste placed or apparently placed for
collection by a Collection Operator. All Recyclable Materials and Waste
placed or apparently placed for collection by a Collection Operator are the
property of the City.
(c) No Owner or Occupant shall be eligible to receive Waste collection services
from a Collection Operator unless that Owner or Occupant complies with
this By-Law.
(d) No person shall set out for collection by a Collection Operator any Waste
except in compliance with this By-Law.
(e) No person shall set out for collection by a Collection Operator any
Container which is not maintained in a manner that allows for the safe
collection of Waste.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 17 of 32
(f) No Owner or Occupant shall permit any Waste that has been set out for
collection to blow away or otherwise escape in any manner prior to
collection.
(g) Where Waste that has been set out for collection has blown away or
otherwise escaped in any manner, the Owner or Occupant of the property
from which the Waste originated shall clean up the Waste.
(h) No person shall set out Waste for collection by a Collection Operator,
except in a location as close as practicable to the travelled portion of the
Street.
(i) No person shall set out Waste for collection in such a manner so as to
obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
8.2 Conditions for Recyclable Materials Collection
No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or, allow, acquiesce in or
cause to be set out for collection, any Recyclable Materials except in accordance
with subsections (a) to (i) inclusive.
(a) The only permitted Containers for Recyclable Materials are:
(i) a securely tied non-returnable clear or translucent plastic bag;
(ii) a blue box provided by the City;
(iii) a plastic receptacle comparable in weight and dimensions to a blue
box provided by the City;
(iv) in addition to the Containers set out in paragraphs (i) to (iii) inclusive,
for multiple dwellings with 6 or more dwelling units, residential care
facilities and commercial properties:
1. a rigid, reusable Container provided by the City having a hinged
lid, wheels and volume not exceeding 364 litres;
2. a receptacle comparable in structure, weight and dimensions to a
Container provided by the City as described in subparagraph 1;
or
3. a Bin Container not less than 2.293 m3 and not exceeding 6.12
m3 in size for Recyclable Fibres only.
(b) Recyclable Containers are empty with:
(i) metal lids removed and placed in a Container permitted under
subsection (a) containing only Recyclable Containers; and
(ii) plastic lids removed and disposed of as Garbage.
(c) Plastic shopping bags are accumulated and placed in an empty plastic
shopping bag, securely tied and placed in a Container permitted under
subsection (a) containing only plastic shopping bags and/or Recyclable
Containers.
(d) Corrugated cardboard, boxboard and paper egg cartons are flattened and
bundled securely and in a size not to exceed 0.75 metres by 0.75 metres by
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 18 of 32
0.2 metres, and placed beside a Container permitted in subsection (a), or
placed loosely in such a Container containing only corrugated cardboard,
boxboard, paper egg cartons and/or other Recyclable Fibres.
(e) Newsprint, magazines, telephone books, fine paper and flyers are placed
loosely in a Container or Bin Container containing only newsprint,
magazines, telephone books, fine paper, flyers and/or other Recyclable
Fibres.
(f) The weight including contents of any Container permitted in paragraphs
(a)(i) to (ii) inclusive or bundle permitted under subsection (c) does not
exceed 13 kilograms.
(g) No Recyclable Materials are frozen to or in any way attached to or in a
condition in which they cannot discharge freely from a Container permitted
under subsection (a).
(h) Where the property generating the Recyclable Materials is a single
detached dwelling, multiple dwelling with a maximum of 5 dwelling units,
lodging house or place of worship Containers permitted under paragraphs
(a)(i) to (iii) inclusive are set out for collection once per week on the
scheduled Collection Day.
(i) Where the property generating the Recyclable Materials is a multiple
dwelling with 6 or more dwelling units, a residential care facility, commercial
property or elementary or secondary school:
(i) the Owner or Occupant(s) participate in the City’s Garbage program
and Organic Waste program;
(ii) Containers as permitted under subsection (a) are set out for
collection:
1. once per week on the scheduled Collection Day at a commercial
property, except a commercial property in a Special Policy Area,
or elementary or secondary school: or
2. up to three times per week on scheduled Collection Days at a
multiple dwelling with 6 or more dwelling units, a residential care
facility or a commercial property in a Special Policy Area.
8.3 Conditions for Organic Waste Collection
No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or, allow, acquiesce in or
cause to be set out for collection, any Organic Waste except in accordance with
subsections (a) to (e) inclusive.
(a) The only permitted Container for Organic Waste is a green, rigid, reusable
Container equipped and maintained with handles and a hinged lid with a
maximum capacity as approved by the City under its Organic Waste
program.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 19 of 32
(b) Organic Waste deposited in a Container permitted under subsection (a)
may be in a certified compostable liner that is not paper in origin, has BPI
and/or BNQ certification and having a volume not exceeding 10 litres.
(c) No Organic Waste is frozen to or in any way attached to or in a condition in
which they cannot discharge freely from a Container permitted under
subsection (a).
(d) Two (2) additional Containers of Leaf and Yard Waste may be set out for
collection beside the Green Cart each week throughout the year.
(e) Containers permitted under subsection (a) are set out for collection once
per week on the scheduled Collection Day.
8.4 Conditions for Leaf and Yard Waste Collection
No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or, allow, acquiesce in or
cause to be set out for collection, any Leaf and Yard Waste except in accordance
with subsections (a) to (f) inclusive.
(a) The only permitted Containers for Leaf and Yard Waste are:
(i) a rigid, reusable Container with the lid removed;
(ii) a kraft paper bag with the top folded over;
(iii) a bushel basket; or
(iv) a green, rigid, reusable Container equipped and maintained with
handles and a hinged lid with a maximum capacity as approved by
the City under its Organic Waste program.
(b) Where the Leaf and Yard Waste is brush and/or woody material, it is tied in
bundles of not more than 1.2 metres in length and 0.75 metres in diameter.
(c) Individual branches do not exceed 0.07 metres in diameter;
(d) The weight including contents of any Container permitted under subsection
(a) or bundle permitted under subsection (b) does not exceed 23 kilograms.
(e) Containers permitted under paragraphs (a)(i) to (iii) inclusive and bundles
permitted under subsection (b) are set out for collection on Collection Days
designated for the collection of Leaf and Yard Waste.
(f) Containers permitted under paragraph (a)(iv) are set out for collection once
per week on scheduled Collection Days for Organic Waste.
8.5 Conditions for Christmas Tree Collection
No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or, allow, acquiesce in or
cause to be set out for collection, any Christmas tree except in accordance with
subsections (a) to (e) inclusive.
(a) The Christmas tree is natural.
(b) The Christmas tree is not contained in a plastic bag or any other receptacle.
(c) All tinsel and decorations have been removed from the Christmas tree.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 20 of 32
(d) No more than five Christmas trees are set out for collection on each of the
designated Collection Days in January.
(e) The Owner or Occupant is not a Christmas tree vendor.
8.6 Conditions for Garbage Collection
No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or, allow, acquiesce in or
cause to be set out for collection, any Garbage except in accordance with
subsections (a) to (i) inclusive.
(a) The only permitted Containers for Garbage are:
(i) a rigid, reusable Container having:
1. a lid which is readily separable from the Container;
2. a volume of less than 135 litres;
3. a weight including contents not exceeding 23 kilograms; and
4. a diameter which is smaller at the bottom than at the top;
(ii) a non-returnable plastic garbage bag capable of being closed or tied
and containing not more than 23 kilograms of Garbage; or
(iii) a sealed cardboard box containing only broken glass and marked
“GLASS” so that is visible to the Collection Operator;
(iv) in addition to the Containers set out in paragraphs (i) to (iii) inclusive,
for multiple dwellings and residential care facilities:
1. a Bin Container not exceeding 6.12 m3 in size for loose Garbage;
2. a Bin Container no exceeding 2.293 m3 for compacted Garbage.
(b) All wet Garbage is drained and placed in a leak-proof container or bag prior
to placement in a Container permitted under subsection (a).
(c) Ashes are cold and placed in a self-contained receptacle separate from
other types of Waste.
(d) All non-returnable plastic garbage bags are tied securely.
(e) Home Health Care Waste is double bagged in plastic and placed in a
Container permitted under paragraph (a)(i) or (a)(iv) to minimize exposure
to the public and Collection Operators.
(f) No Garbage is frozen to or in any way attached to or in a condition in which
it cannot discharge freely from a Container permitted under subsection (a).
(g) Where the property generating the Garbage is a single detached dwelling,
multiple dwelling with a maximum of 5 dwelling units or lodging house:
(i) from March 28, 2009 until April 5, 2010. no more than one Container
permitted under paragraphs (a)(i) and (ii) and one clear plastic
garbage bag that meets all requirements under this By-law are set
out for collection per dwelling unit once per week on the scheduled
Collection Day;
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 21 of 32
(ii) after April 5, 2010, no more than one Container permitted under
paragraphs (a)(i) and (ii) is set out for collection per dwelling unit
once per week on the scheduled Collection Day;
(iii) notwithstanding paragraphs (g)(i) and (ii), on the first scheduled
Collection Day following Victoria Day, Thanksgiving Day and New
Year’s Day no more than three Containers permitted under
paragraphs (a)(i) and (ii) are set out for collection per dwelling unit.
.
(h) Where the property generating the Garbage is a multiple dwelling with 6 or
more units or residential care facility:
(i) the Owner or Occupant(s) participate in the City’s recycling program
and Organic Waste program;
(ii) no more than one Container permitted under paragraphs (a)(i) and (ii)
per dwelling unit is set out for collection once per week on the
scheduled Collection Day; and
(iii) no more than three Bin Containers permitted under paragraph (a)(iv)
are set out for collection three times per week on the scheduled
Collection Day; and
(i) Where the property generating the Garbage is a commercial property:
(i) the Owner or Occupant(s) participate in the City’s recycling program
and Organic Waste program;
(ii) no more than six Containers permitted under paragraphs a(i) and a(ii)
are set out for collection:
1. once per week at a commercial property, except a commercial
property in a Special Policy Area; or
2. up to three times per week in a Special Policy Area where
enhanced Garbage collection is provided.
on the scheduled Collection Day.
8.7 Conditions for Bulk Waste Collection
No Owner or Occupant shall set out for collection, or, allow, acquiesce in or
cause to be set out for collection, any Bulk Waste except in accordance with
subsections (a) to (h) inclusive:
(a) Each Bulk Waste item weighs no more than 90 kilograms.
(b) All Bulk Waste items are broken down or dismantled so that the parts or
pieces do not exceed 1.2 metres in length.
(c) All moveable parts within the Bulk Waste item are secured (e.g. sofa beds).
(d) All carpets are rolled and securely tied.
(e) All batteries and light bulbs are removed.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 22 of 32
(f) Where the property generating the Bulk Waste is a single detached
dwelling, multiple dwelling with a maximum of 5 dwelling units, lodging house,
residential care facility or place of worship:
(i) not more than 4 Bulk Waste items are set out for collection;
(ii) during the designated Bulk Collection period a call is made to the City
at least one week prior to a Collection Day and the Bulk Waste is set
out for collection on that Collection Day.
(g) Where the property generating the Bulk Waste is a multiple dwelling with
less than 4 floors:
(i) not more than 8 Bulk Waste items are set out for collection; and
(ii) during the designated Bulk Collection period a call is made to the City
at least one week prior to a Collection Day and the Bulk Waste is set
out for collection on that Collection Day.
(h) Where the property generating the Bulk Waste is a multiple dwelling with 5
or more floors:
(i) not more than 8 Bulk Waste items are set for collection; and
(ii) a call is made to the City at least one week prior to the designated
Collection Day and the Bulk Waste is set out for collection on that
Collection Day.
9.0 WASTE MANAGEMENT FACILITIES
9.1 Transfer Stations and Community Recycling Centres
General
(a) All Waste deposited at a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre is
the property of the City and no person shall scavenge or remove any Waste
from a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre.
(b) All Waste deposited at a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre is
the property of the City and may be salvaged, recycled, reclaimed, disposed
of and otherwise dealt with as the City may deem fit.
Delivery and Disposal of Acceptable Waste
(c) No person shall deliver or dispose of or allow or cause to be delivered or
disposed of any Waste at a Transfer Station or Community Recycling
Centre other than Acceptable Waste.
(d) Notwithstanding subsection (c), no operator of Residential Vehicle shall
deliver or dispose of any Garbage that includes Recyclable Materials at a
Community Recycling Centre.
(e) No person shall deliver, or dispose of or allow or cause to be delivered or
disposed any Garbage originating from outside the City at a Transfer Station
or Community Recycling Centre.
(f) No person shall convey, or allow or cause to be conveyed, any Waste for
disposal to a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre which is not
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 23 of 32
contained in fully enclosed vehicle bodies, or totally enclosed or covered in
canvas, tarpaulins or nets, and leak-proof so as to prevent any of the contents
from falling upon the ground.
(g) No person shall enter Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre
except in a motor vehicle.
(h) All persons shall enter or exit a Transfer Station or Community Recycling
Centre by the designated access and exit routes.
(i) No person, while at a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre, shall:
(i) indulge in any riotous, violent, threatening or illegal conduct, or use
profane or abusive language;
(ii) create a nuisance or in any way interfere with the use of the Transfer
Station or Community Recycling Centre by any other person;
(iii) operate a vehicle or do any other thing without exercising due care and
attention or in a manner that causes or is likely to cause injury or harm
to any person or damage to any property; or
(iv) allow any child, who is under the age of fourteen years, and is under
the person’s care, custody or control, to be outside of their vehicle at
a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre.
(j) No person shall deposit or allow or cause to be deposited any Waste except
in the disposal areas of a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre so
designated for such purposes.
(k) Every person using a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre shall
at all times obey all signs and directions of all City staff and Contractor(s) at
any Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre.
(l) No person shall dispose of, or allow or cause to be disposed of, any Waste at
a Transfer Station or Community Recycling Centre that is not properly drained
or dried so that it does not contain any visible evidence of free water, or other
liquids.
(m) No person shall dispose of, or allow or cause to be disposed of, Household
Pet Waste at a Transfer Station in a greater quantity than that generated in
one dwelling unit.
9.2 City Landfill Site
No person shall deliver Waste to the City Landfill Site, except for:
(a) Contractors operating transfer vehicles and delivering Waste for disposal;
(b) City staff or Contractors operating vehicles and delivering catch basin sludge
or Street sweepings;
(c) City staff or Contractors operating vehicles and delivering grit and scum
sludge from the City’s Woodward Avenue Wastewater Treatment Plant; and
(d) City staff or Contractors operating vehicles and delivering Leaf and Yard
Waste.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 24 of 32
9.3 Materials Recycling Facility
General
(a) All Recyclable Materials at the Materials Recycling Facility are the property of
the City and no person shall scavenge or remove any Recyclable Materials
from the Materials Recycling Facility.
(b) All Recyclable Materials deposited at the Materials Recycling Facility are the
property of the City and may be salvaged, recycled, reclaimed, disposed of
and otherwise dealt with as the City may deem fit.
Delivery and Disposal of Recyclable Materials
(c) No Contractor or Collection Operator shall deliver, dispose of, or allow or
cause to be delivered or disposed of any Waste at the Materials Recycling
Facility other than Recyclable Materials.
(d) No Contractor or Collection Operator shall convey, or allow or cause to be
conveyed, any Recyclable Materials to the Materials Recycling Facility which
are not contained in fully enclosed vehicle bodies, or totally enclosed or
covered in canvas, tarpaulins or nets, and leak-proof so as to prevent any of
the contents from falling upon the ground.
(e) All Contractors and Collection Operators shall enter or exit the Materials
Recycling Facility by the designated access and exit routes only.
(f) Any Contractor or Collection Operator using the Materials Recycling Facility
shall at all times obey all signs and directions of all City staff and the
Contractor(s) operating the Materials Recycling Facility.
9.4 Central Composting Facility
General
(a) All Organic Materials at the Central Composting Facility are the property of
the City and no person shall scavenge or remove any Organic Materials from
the Central Composting Facility.
(b) All Organic Waste deposited at the Central Composting Facility are the
property of the City and may be processed, disposed of and otherwise dealt
with as the City may deem fit.
Delivery and Disposal of Organic Waste
(c) No Contractor or Collection Operator shall convey, or allow or cause to be
conveyed, any Organic Materials to the Central Composting Facility which are
not contained in fully enclosed vehicle bodies, or totally enclosed or covered
in canvass, tarpaulins or nets, and leak-proof so as to prevent any of the
contents from falling upon the ground.
(d) All Contractors and Collection Operators shall enter or exit the Central
Composting Facility by the designated access and exit routes only.
To provide for and regulate a Waste Management System for the City of Hamilton
Page 25 of 32
(e) Any Contractor or Collection Operator using the Central Composting Facilty
shall at all times obey all signs and directions of all City staff and the
Contractor(s) operating the Central Composting Facility.
10.0 REPEAL
By-Law No. 05-190 is repealed.
11.0 EFFECTIVE DATE
This By-Law shall come into force on the day it is passed.
day of April, 2009.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 1st
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor
SCHEDULE “A”
FACILITIES
1. Dundas Transfer Station and Community Recycling Centre
2. Kenora Transfer Station and Community Recycling Centre
3. Mountain Transfer Station and Community Recycling Centre
4. Resource Recovery Centre comprised of the Material Recycling Facility and
Central Composting Facility
5. City Landfill Site
6. Leaf and Yard Waste Depots
SCHEDULE “B”
METRIC TO IMPERIAL MEASUREMENT CONVERSIONS
0.2 METRES = .66 FEET
0.3 METRES = .98 FEET
0.6 METRES = 1.97 FEET
0.7 METRES = 2.3 FEET
0.75 METRES = 2.5 FEET
1.2 METRES = 3.94 FEET
2 METRES = 6.56 FEET
2.293 CUBIC METRES = 3 CUBIC YARDS
6.12 CUBIC METRES = 8 CUBIC YARDS
135 LITRES = 29.7 GALLONS
140 LITRES = 37 GALLONS
240 LITRES = 63.4 GALLONS
364 LITRES = 96.1 GALLONS
2.3 KILOGRAMS = 5.07 POUNDS
13 KILOGRAMS = 28.66 POUNDS
23 KILOGRAMS = 50.7 POUNDS
90 KILOGRAMS = 198.5 POUNDS
100 KILOGRAMS = 220 POUNDS
150 KILOGRAMS = 330 POUNDS
1000 KILOGRAMS = 1 TONNE = 2200 POUNDS
1001 KILOGRAMS = 1.003 TONNES = 2206.6 POUNDS
3000 KILOGRAMS = 3 TONNES = 6600 POUNDS
3001 KILOGRAMS = 3.007 TONNES = 6615.4 POUNDS
6000 KILOGRAMS = 6 TONNES = 13,200 POUNDS
6001 KILOGRAMS = 6.01 TONNES = 13,222 POUNDS
9000 KILOGRAMS = 9 TONNES = 19,800 POUNDS
SCHEDULE “C”
FEES
A. WASTE DISPOSAL ACTIVITY FEE
1) Residential Vehicles transporting Garbage $8.00 per visit for the first 100 kg or part
thereof; $0.1125 per kg in excess of 100
kg*
2) Residential Vehicles transporting separated No charge
Recyclable Materials, Leaf and Yard Waste and
ferrous and non-ferrous bulk metals
3) Private Waste Haulers and Commercial Vehicles $11.25 per visit per 100 kg. or part
transporting Waste thereof*
4) Commercial Vehicles possessing a signed $8.00 per visit for the first 100 kg or part
affidavit transporting Waste for personal use thereof of Garbage, and $0.1125 per kg in
excess of 100 kg*; no charge for
separated Leaf and Yard Waste; no
charge for separated Recyclable
Materials and ferrous and non-ferrous
bulk metals
5) Application for account set-up and credit check $30.00
for Private Haulers and Commercial Vehicles
6) Alternate Fee for Private Haulers and $32.00 per cubic metre of carrying
Commercial Vehicles in the event that the weigh capacity of the vehicle
scales become inoperative
7) Credit card, debit or cash deposit required based 0-2,500 kg $50.00
on gross weight of a Private Hauler’s Vehicle or
2,501-3,000 kg $100.00
Commercial Vehicle with an account with the
City 3,001-6,000 kg $200.00
6,001-9,000 kg $300.00
over 9,000 kg $400.00
8) Impacted Soil Fee $30.00 per tonne
For soil used as daily cover at the City Landfill
Site that meets the certificate of approval criteria
for the site. This fee does not apply to native,
non-impacted soils.
*All transactions are rounded to the nearest $0.50
B. CONDITIONS FOR WASTE DISPOSAL FEES
1) For the purpose of this By-Law, regular users of the Transfer Stations may be
regarded as:
(a) the Private Hauler and the operator of a Commercial Vehicle depositing
Waste averaging a minimum of two chargeable loads per week and/or;
(b) the Private Hauler and the operator of a Commercial Vehicle whose
monthly invoice is not less than $50.00.
2) Private Haulers and Operators of Commercial Vehicles - Regular Users
(a) Accounts for fees payable by Private Haulers and by operators of
Commercial Vehicles who are regular users of the Facilities are to be
invoiced at such regular periods as prescribed by the General Manager of
Corporate Services.
(b) Payment of such accounts as set forth in (a) above of this subsection B(2)
shall be payable within thirty (30) calendar days of the date of the invoice.
(c) Where an account for Waste disposal fees remains unpaid for more than
thirty (30) calendar days, the Private Hauler or operator of a Commercial
Vehicle will be notified in statement form including the greater of interest
charges or a minimum service charge and a notice of non-payment shall
be sent by the General Manager of Corporate Services advising that if
payment is not received within ten (10) calendar days after the date of
such notice, the Private Hauler’s or operator of Commercial Vehicle’s use
of the City Transfer Stations shall be restricted to a cash basis. If an
account remains unpaid for an additional ten (10) calendar days,
admittance to the Facilities shall be refused until such time as the original
invoice plus all outstanding interest and service charges to date are paid.
The names of these Private Haulers and operators of Commercial
Vehicles will be placed on a list and sent to the Transfer Stations
instructing the weigh masters to refuse entry to those customers on the
list. The General Manager of Corporate Services may require the posting
of a performance bond or any other security acceptable to the General
Manager of Corporate Services in the event that accounts continue from
time-to-time to remain unpaid.
(d) Where the tare weight of a vehicle transporting Waste for disposal at the
Facilities has been pre-determined and such weight issued to calculate
the net weight of the Waste, the pre-determined tare weight of any vehicle
may be verified at any time by either the City or the Private Hauler.
3) Private Haulers - Occasional Users
(a) The amount of fees payable by Private Haulers and by operators of
Commercial Vehicles who are occasional users at the Facilities are
payable upon entering the Facilities.
(b) Where the Private Hauler or operator of a Commercial Vehicle
transporting Waste for disposal at the Facilities is required to be tare
weighed before the fees can be calculated, the Private Hauler or operator
of a Commercial Vehicle shall be required to place a deposit as set forth in
Section A of this Schedule. When the tare weight has been determined,
the deposit shall be refunded and an immediate payment shall be made
via a City approved credit card, debit, or cash for the Waste disposal fee
by the Private Hauler or by the operator of a Commercial Vehicle in
accordance with Section A of this Schedule.
(c) Where the tare weight of a vehicle transporting Waste for disposal at the
Facilities has been pre-determined, and such weight issued to calculate
the net weight of the Waste, the pre-determined tare weight of any vehicle
may be verified at any time by either the City or the Private Hauler.
C. OTHER WASTE MANAGEMENT FEES
WASTE MANAGEMENT SERVICE FEE
1) Backyard Composters $38.75 per composter
2) Green Cart Replacement $25.00 per Container
To be charged for each broken green rigid reusable Container
for Organic Waste, issued by the City under its Organic Waste
program, where the broken Container cannot be presented for
exchange.
3) Festival and Event Waste Management Services Security $1,000.00
Deposit
This security deposit applies to all festivals and events and is
fully refundable provided that:
a) the Recyclable Materials and Organic Waste collected are
sufficiently uncontaminated so that they may be processed;
and
b) all containers and signage are returned to the City without
any damage.
Where these criteria are not met, the City will deduct from the
security deposit the costs incurred by the City for the landfilling
of the collected unacceptable materials and the costs incurred
by the City for the replacement and repair of any containers and
signage. The balance of the security deposit will be refunded.
4) Waste Management Services per Event Fee for Non-Funded
Festivals and Events at City-owned facilities.
Where events are held at City-owned facilities which are not
eligible for funding for the provision of waste management
services, the applicable fees are for the following services:
Recycling - Fee is for the drop-off, use and pick-up of up to 25 $1,200.00
recycling barrels, and disposal of materials at the appropriate
Facility.
Garbage - Fee is for the drop-off, use and pick-up of each roll-off $150.00 per roll-off bin plus
bin, plus the cost of disposal. the Waste disposal fee for
Garbage set out in section
A 1) of this Schedule.
Organic Waste - Fee is for the drop-off, use and pick-up of up to $535.00
25 green rigid reusable containers for Organic Waste, and the
disposal of the materials at the appropriate Facility.
Administrative Fee - Fee is for City staff time, operating $115.00 per event
expenses and cleaning of containers.
5) Waste Management Services per Event Fee for Non-Funded
Festivals and Events at non City-owned facilities.
Where events are held at non City-owned facilities, waste
management services are requested to be provided, and
sufficient City resources are available to accommodate the
request, the applicable fees are for the following services:
Recycling - Fee is for the drop-off, use and pick-up of up to 25 $1,200.00
recycling barrels, and disposal of materials at the appropriate
Facility.
Garbage - Fee is for the drop-off, use and pick-up of each roll-off $150.00 per roll-off bin plus
bin, plus the cost of disposal. the Waste disposal fee for
Garbage set out in section
A 1) of this Schedule.
Organic Waste - Fee is for the drop-off, use and pick-up of up to $535.00
25 green rigid reusable containers for Organic Waste, and the
disposal of the materials at the appropriate Facility.
Administrative Fee - Fee is for City staff time, operating $115.00 per event
expenses and cleaning of containers.



Content from 09090 to amend sewer use bylaw bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 8, Public Works Committee
03)
Report 08-014 (PW081
CM: September 24, 2008
Bil No. 090
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-090
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and enacted By-law No. 04-150,
known and referred to as the "Sewer Use By-law", which came into force on June 30,
2004;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting of September 24, 2008, the Council of the City of
Hamilon did approve of Item 8 of the Public Works Committee Report 08-014 and did
thereby authorize the amendments to the Sewer Use By-law contained in this By-law;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the following new
section 1:
SECTION 1
DEFINITIONS
1. In this By-law,
. "acute hazardous waste chemical" means a material which is an acute hazardous
waste chemical within the meaning of Ontario Regulation 347 made under the
Environmental Protection Act;
"authorized representative of the owner or operator" means:
(a) a principal executive offcer of at least the level of vice president, if the
owner or operator is a corporation; or
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 2 of 14
a general partner or proprietor if the owner or operator is a
(b)
partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or
(c) a duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if
such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the sewage discharge originates;
"biochemical oxygen demand" means carbonaceous oxygen demand
(biochemical) as determined by Standard Methods when an inhibiting chemical has
been added to prevent the oxidation of reduced forms of nitrogen;
"blowdown" means the discharge of recirculating noncontact cooling water or
heating water for the purpose of discharging materials contained in the water, the
further build-up of which would cause concentrations in amounts exceeding limits
established by best engineering practices;
"Building Code Act, 1992" means the Buildina Code Act. 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 23;
"By-law" means this by-law;
"City" means the City of Hamilton or its designated representative;
"combined sewer" means a sewer intended to function simultaneously as a storm
sewer and a sanitary sewer;
"commercial waste chemical" means a material which is a commercial waste
chemical within the meaning of Ontario Regulation 347, made under the
Environmental Protection Act;
"composite sample" means a sample which is composed of a series of grab
samples taken at intervals during the sampling period;
"cyanide (total)" means all the CN groups in cyanide compounds as determined by
Standard Methods;
"de minimis dose" means a dose of radiation to an individual of .05 milisieverts per
year;
"de minimis waste" means any waste radioactive material that wil not result in a
dose of radiation exceeding the de minimis dose regardless of the quantity of the
material or how it is used or managed;
"Environmental Protection Act" means the Environmental Protection Act, R.S.O.
1990, c. E.19;
2
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 3 of 14
"flow proportional composite sampling" means sampling with a piece of equipment
that is capable of operating continuously and automatically adjusting, at time
intervals not exceeding thirty minutes, either the volume of effuent sub-samples or
the time interval between the collection of sub-samples, to the rate of flow in the
effuent stream;
"fuels" includes (i) any ignitable liquid intended for use as a fuel with a flash point
less than 61 degrees Celsius as determined by one of the methods in Ontario
Regulation 347, made under the Environmental Protection Act, and (ii) gasoline,
naphtha, diesel fuel or fuel oil;
"General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services" means the General
Manager of Finance and Corporate Services for the City of Hamilton or such
person as is duly authorized or designated to act in his or her stead, or successor;
"General Manager of Public Works" means the General Manager of Public Works
for the City of Hamilton or the person duly authorized or designated to act in his or
her stead, or successor;
"grab sample" is an aliquot of the flow being sampled taken at one particular time
and place;
"hauled industrial wastes" means any industrial wastes transported by a carrier
from a generator located within the boundaries of the City of Hamilton;
"hauled sewage" means waste removed from a cesspool, a septic tank system, a
privy vault or privy pit, a chemical toilet, a portable toilet, a sewage holding tank,
any hauled sewage defined under Ontario Regulation 347, made under the
Environmental Protection Act, or any other sewage system of a type regulated
under Part 8 of the Building Code made under the BuildinQ Code Act. 1992;
"Hauled Wastewater Discharge Manifest" means the document to be completed
by a carrier of hauled sewage or hauled industrial wastes, or both, in the form
prescribed by the General Manager of Public Works;
"hazardous industrial waste" means a material which is a hazardous industrial
waste within the meaning of Ontario Regulation 347, made under the
Environmental Protection Act;
"hazardous waste chemical" means a material which is a hazardous waste
chemical within the meaning of Ontario Regulation 347, made under the
Environmental Protection Act;
3
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 4 of 14
"ignitable waste" means a material which is an ignitable waste within the meaning
of Ontario Regulation 347, made under the Environmental Protection Act;
"industrial" shall mean of or pertaining to industry, manufacturing, commerce, trade,
business, or institutions as distinguished from domestic or residential;
"industrial process area" means any industrial building, property or land area which
during manufacturing, processing or storage comes into direct contact with any raw
material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, or waste product;
"industrial wastes" means all water carred wastes and wastewaters of the
geographic area of the City of Hamilton excluding domestic wastewater and
uncontaminated water, and shall .include all wastewater from any producing,
manufacturing, processing, institutional, commercial, agricultural or other operation
where the wastewater discharged includes significant quantities of wastes of non-
human origin;
"joined sanitary-foundation drain sewer" means a sewer for the collection and
transmission of domestic wastes and groundwater from a foundation drain;
"Kjeldahl Nitrogen" means organic nitrogen and ammonia determined together in
accordance with Standard Methods;
"matter" includes any solid, liquid or gas;
"NAICS" means North American Industry Classification System Manual published
by the Executive Offce of the President, Offce of Management and Budget;
"noncontact cooling water" means water which is used to reduce temperature for
the purpose of cooling and which does not come into direct contact with any raw
material, intermediate product other than heat, or finished product;
"once-through cooling water" means noncontact cooling water that has been
circulated once through the cooling device;
"Ontario Water Resources Act" means the Ontario Water Resources Act, R.S.O.
1990, c.0.40;
"owner" or "operator" means the owner or operator of any facilty or activity subject
to the provisions of this By-law;
4
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 5 of 14
"pathological waste" means a material which is a pathological waste within the
meaning of Ontario Regulation 347, made under the Environmental Protection Act,
or any material which may be designated in writing by the Chief Medical Offcer of
Health (Ontario);
"PCB" means any monochlorinated or polychlorinated biphenyl or any mixture of
them, or mixture that contains one or more of them, as determined by Standard
Methods;
"PCB waste" means a PCB waste within the meaning of Ontario Regulation 352,
made under the Environmental Protection Act;
"person" includes an individual, association, partnership, corporation, municipality,
Regional Municipality, Provincial or Federal agency, or an agent or employee
thereof;
"pesticides" means a pesticide regulated under the Pesticides Act,
"Pesticides Act" means the Pesticides Act, RS.O. 1990, chapter P.11;
"pH" means the logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the concentration of
hydrogen ions, as determined by Standard Methods;
"phenolic compounds" means hydroxy derivatives of benzene and its condensed
nuclei, as determined by Standard Methods;
"phosphorus" means total phosphorus as determined by Standard Methods;
"potable water" means water processed by the City for human consumption;
"reactive waste" means a material which is a reactive waste within the meaning of
Ontario Regulation 347, made under the Environmental Protection Act;
"sanitary sewer" means a sewer for the collection and transmission of domestic,
commercial, institutional and industrial sewage or any combination thereof;
"severely toxic material" means any material listed in Schedule 3 of Ontario
Regulation 347, made under the Environmental Protection Act;
"sewage" means any liquid waste containing animal, vegetable or mineral matter in
solution or in suspension, but does not include stormwater or uncontaminated
water;
5
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 6 of 14
"sewage works" means any works for the collection, transmission, treatment or
disposal of sewage, stormwater or uncontaminated water, including a combined
sewer, sanitary sewer or stormsewer, or any part of such works, but does not
include plumbing or other works to which the BuildinQ Code Act. 1992 applies;
"solvent extractable matter of animal or vegetable origin" means animal or
vegetable oil and grease, as determined by Standard Methods;
"solvent extractable matter of mineral or synthetic origin" means mineral or
synthetic oil and grease, as determined by Standard Methods;
"Standard Methods" means a procedure set out in the latest edition of Standard
Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater published jointly by the
American Public Health Association, American Water Works Association and
Water Environment Federation, or an Ontario Ministry of the Environment
approved procedure, or a procedure, modified or validated by the City, as set out in
the City document entitled "Methods Manual", as amended, repealed or replaced
from time to time;
"storm sewer" means a sewer for the collection and transmission of
uncontaminated water, stormwater, drainage from land or from a watercourse or
any combination thereof;
"stormwater" means water from rainfall or other natural precipitation or from the
melting of snow or ice;
"suspended solids" means solid matter in or on a liquid, which matter is removable
by fitering, as determined by Standard Methods;
"Total PAHs" means the total of all the polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons listed
under the Canada Ontario Agreement Tier i and Tier II Substance Lists, i.e.
anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(e)pyrene,
benzo(b )fluoranthene, benzoU)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene,
benzo(g,h,i)perylene, chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, dibenzo(a,i)pyrene,
dibenzo(a,j)acridine, 7H-dibenzo(c,g)carbazole, dinitropyrene, fluoranthene,
indeno(1,2,3-c,d)pyrene, perylene, phenanthrene and pyrene, as determined by
Standard Methods;
"uncontaminated water" means water to which no matter has been added as a
consequence of its use, or to modify its use, by any person;
"waste disposal site leachate" means leachate from any waste disposal site;
6
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 7 of 14
"waste radioactive materials" means any waste material exhibiting the property of
spontaneous disintegration of atomic nuclei usually with the emission of penetrating
radiation or particles.
2. Subclause 4(1 )2.(r) is deleted and replaced with the following new subclause
4(1 )2.(r):
the following materials or sewage containing any of the following in any
(r)
amount:
hauled sewage
waste disposal site leachate
hauled industrial wastes
3. Subsection 4(9) of By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the following
new subsection 4(9):
(9) Subclause 4(1 )2.(r) does not apply to prevent the discharge of hauled
sewage when:
(a) the carrier of the hauled sewage is a waste transportation system
operating under an approval issued under the Environmental
Protection Act, and regulations thereunder, and a copy of such
approval has been provided to the City:
(b) the carrier is discharging hauled sewage only from generators
located within the boundaries of the City of Hamilton;
(c) the carrier has a current annual permit issued by the City to
discharge hauled sewage;
(d) the carrier of the hauled sewage submits an originally completed
and signed Hauled Wastewater Discharge Manifest;
(e) the discharge occurs only at the times and locations set out in
Schedule C to this By-law;
the carrier pays the applicable fees as set out in this By-law and in
(f)
the City's Water and Wastewater User Fees and Charges By-law.
For the purposes of such fees, hauled sewage shall only be
7
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 8 of 14
considered to be compliant where the generator of the hauled
sewage has provided the General Manager of Public Works with
prior laboratory analytical data, satisfactory to the General Manager
of Public Works, indicating that the hauled sewage is in compliance
with the parameters contained in this By-law;
(g) the hauled sewage complies with all of the parameters contained in
this By-law, except for one or more of the following treatable
parameters: biochemical oxygen demand, oil and grease
(animal/vegetable), phenols, suspended solids, phosphorous, and
Kjeldahl Nitrogen; and
(h) the carrier of the hauled sewage has accurately represented the
nature of the hauled sewage on the Hauled Wastewater Discharge
Manifest, including without limitation the quantity or quality of the
hauled sewage, and the source of the hauled sewage, and has
otherwise complied with this By-law.
If the foregoing is not the case, then in addition to any other actions that
the City may take under this By-law, the General Manager of Public Works
may deny access to the carrier or the generator of the hauled sewage, or
both, to the City's wastewater treatment plants for up to fourteen (14)
only
calendar days. Thereafter, the said carrier or generator, or both, may
discharge the hauled sewage in accordance with the provisions of this By-
law.
4. Clause 4(9)(g) of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the word "phenols".
5. Section 4 of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by adding the following subsection
4( 12) immediately after subsection 4( 11) and renumbering the subsequent
subsections accordingly:
(12) Subclause 4(1 )2.(r) does not apply to prevent the discharge of hauled
industrial wastes when:
(a) effective September 1, 2009, the generator of the hauled industrial
wastes has a current annual permit issued by the City authorizing
the discharge of such hauled industrial wastes;
(b) the carrier of the hauled industrial wastes is a waste transportation
system operating under an approval issued under the
Environmental Protection Act, and regulations thereunder, and a
copy of such approval has been provided to the City;
8
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 9 of 14
(c) the carrier is discharging hauled industrial wastes only from
generators located within the boundaries of the City of Hamilton;
(d) the carrier has a current annual permit issued by the City to
discharge hauled industrial wastes;
(e) the discharge occurs only at the times and locations set out in
Schedule C to this By-law; and
the carrier of the hauled industrial wastes pays the applicable fees
(f)
as set out in this By-law and in the City's Water and Wastewater
User Fees and Charges By-law. For the purposes of such fees,
hauled industrial wastes shall only be considered to be compliant
where the generator of the hauled industrial wastes has provided
the General Manager of Public Works with prior laboratory
analytical data, satisfactory to the General Manager of Public
Works, indicating that the hauled industrial wastes are in
compliance with the parameters contained in this By-law;
(g) the hauled industrial wastes comply with all of the parameters
contained in this By-law, except for one or more of the following
treatable parameters: biochemical oxygen demand, oil and grease
(animal/vegetable), phenols, suspended solids, phosphorous, and
Kjeldahl Nitrogen; and
(h) the carrier of the hauled industrial wastes has accurately
represented the nature of the hauled industrial wastes on the
Hauled Wastewater Discharge Manifest, including without limitation
the quantity or quality of the hauled industrial wastes, and the
source of the hauled industrial wastes, and has otherwise complied
with this By-law.
If the foregoing is not the case, then in addition to any other actions that
the City may take under this By-law, the General Manager of Public Works
may deny access to the carrier or the generator of the hauled industrial
wastes, or both, to the City's wastewater treatment plants for up to
fourteen (14) calendar days. Thereafter, the said carrier or generator, or
both, may only discharge the hauled industrial wastes in accordance with
the provisions of this By-law.
6. Clause 4(12)(g) of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the word "phenols".
9
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 10 of 14
7. Subclause 5(1 )2.(f) of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the words
"Phenolic Compounds" under the heading of "0.02 miligrams/litre" and replacing
them with the words "phenolic compounds".
8. Clause 7(2)(a) of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the words "phenolic
compounds".
9. By-law No. 04-150 is amended by adding the following Section 11 after Section
10 and renumbering the subsequent sections accordingly:
SECTION 11
PERMITS AND FORMS
11.(1) No person shall discharge hauled sewage or hauled industrial wastes, or both, at
any of the locations set out in Schedule C to this By-law without having
previously obtained a current annual permit issued by the City to discharge
hauled sewage.
(2) No person shall discharge hauled sewage or hauled industrial wastes, or both, at
any of the locations set out in Schedule C to this By-law where any of the hauled
sewage has been generated from a location outside the boundaries of the City of
Hamilton.
(3) No person shall discharge hauled sewage or hauled industrial wastes, or both, at
any of the locations set out in Schedule C to this By-law unless prior to doing so,
the person submits to the City an originally signed, fully completed and legible
Hauled Wastewater Discharge Manifest regarding such hauled sewage.
(4) No person discharging hauled sewage or hauled industrial wastes, or both, at
any of the locations set out in Schedule C to this By-law shall submit a Hauled
Wastewater Discharge Manifest that contains inaccurate or false information.
(5) Effective September 1, 2009, no person shall discharge hauled industrial wastes
at any of the locations set out in Schedule C to this By-law, unless each
generator of such hauled industrial wastes has a current annual permit issued by
the City to discharge hauled industrial wastes from its property.
(6) Every person applying for an annual permit to discharge hauled sewage or
hauled industrial wastes, or both, or for an annual generator permit to discharge
hauled industrial wastes shall:
10
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 11 of 14
(a) provide the General Manager of Public Works with such information as the
General Manager of Public Works considers necessary to determine if a
permit should be issued;
(b) in the case of the annual generator permit to discharge hauled industrial
wastes, allow the City to access the generatots industrial waste storage
container(s) in order to take samples of the proposed hauled industrial
wastes to determine if the hauled industrial wastes are in compliance with
the parameters contained in this By-law; and
(c) pay the prescribed application fee for such permit as set out in this By-law
and in the City's Water and Wastewater User Fees and Charges By-law.
10. Section 11 of By-law No. 04-150, renumbered as Section 12, is amended by
adding the following subsection (16):
(16) Any references in this By-law to any statutes, regulations or by-laws shall
be deemed to be a reference to such statutes, regulations or by-laws, as
amended, restated or replaced from time to time.
11. All of Schedule B to By-law No. 04-150 except the title is deleted and the word
"deleted" in square brackets is added after the title.
12. Schedule C to By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the title and replacing
the title with the following:
SCHEDULE C
CITY LOCATIONS AND TIMES FOR DISCHARGE OF HAULED SEWAGE
AND HAULED INDUSTRIAL WASTES
(Referred to in subsections 4(9),4(10) and 4(12)
13. Schedule D to By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the Schedule D
attached to this by-law.
14. Section 3 of Schedule D to By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the
parameter "Phenolic Compounds" and the associated fee of $0.6397 cents/kg.
15. Schedule G to By-law No. 04-150 is amended by:
(a) deleting the words "Phenolic Compounds" in the third paragraph on the first
page of Schedule G;
11
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 12 of 14
deleting the words "Phenolic Compounds" in the introductory paragraph to
(b)
section 2;
(c) deleting subsection 2(c) and relettering the subsequent subsections
accordingly;
deleting the words "Phenolic Compounds" in section 3; and
(d)
deleting the words "an excess phenolic compounds of
(e)
milligrams/litre," in subsection 11 (1).
16. This by-law shall come into force on May 1, 2009, except for the following:
(a) section 2 which shall come into force on September 1, 2009; and
(b) sections 4, 6, 8, 14 and 15 which shall come into force on January 1, 2010.
PASSED and ENACTED this 29th day of April, 2009.
~on
Fred Eisenberger
M~yor City Clerk
12
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 13 of 14
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVE MAY 1, 2009
1. Annual carrier permit to discharge hauled sewage
or hauled industrial wastes, or both $266.45*
2. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage and hauled industrial wastes:
Fee for
Fee for
discharge: discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewage/Hauled compliant compliant
Wastes . Vehicle
Industrial
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 m3 or
gallons or any part any part thereof $ 40.10* $40.10*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 40.10* $80.20*
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 than 15.9
Greater
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 80.20* $120.30*
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $120.30* $200.48*
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $160.40* $240.58*
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10000 imperial m3
gallons
13
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 14 of 14
(b) Discharge fees for holding tanks of
recreational vehicles
$ 5.27*
3. Overstrength discharge fees
Fee cents/k
$0.6397*
$0.5117*
$0.6397*
$0.5373*
$1.9478*
$1.3702*
4. Administrative fees for sewer use agreements (minimum charges per quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $262.77*
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $262.77*
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $262.77*
5. Spils response fee (per hour)
$ 56.82*
6. Information request fee $120.89*
* plus applicable taxes
14



Content from 09110 public nuisance bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
, Report 09-015 (PED09127)
CM: May 27,2009
Bil No. 110
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-110
A By-law to prohibit and regulate certain public nuisances within the
City of Hamilton
WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act. 2001, S.D. 2001, Chapter 25 (the
"Municipal Act. 2001 ") authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or
desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 5, 6 and 8 of subsection
10(2) authorize by-laws respecting the economic social and environmental well-being of
the municipality, the health, safety and well-being of persons and the protection of
persons and property;
AND WHEREAS section 128 of the Municipal Act. 2001 provides that a local
municipality may prohibit and regulate with respect to public nuisances, including
matters that in the opinion of Council are or could become public nuisances;
AND WHEREAS in the opinion of Council for the City of Hamilton the act of urinating or
defecating in public places is or could become a public nuisance;
AND WHEREAS in the opinion of Council for the City of Hamilton, the act of knocking
over mailboxes, relay boxes, newspaper boxes, recycling boxes and other waste
containers located on highways is or could become a public nuisance;
AND WHEREAS Section 425 of the Municipal Act. 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton
to pass by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of
Hamilton passed under that Act is guilty of an offence;
Page 2 of 3
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Definitions
1. In this By-law:
(a) "City" means the geographical area of the City of Hamilton or the
municipal corporation as the context requires;
(b) "highway" includes a common and public highway, street, avenue,
parkway, driveway, square, place, bridge, viaduct or trestle, any part of
which is intended for or used by the general public for the passage of
vehicles or person, and includes the area between the lateral property
lines thereof, including sidewalks and boulevards; and
(c) "public place" includes a highway and any place to which the public
has access as of right or by invitation, express or implied, and private
property that is exposed to public view, but does not include a
washroom facility.
Prohibitions
2.(1) No person shall urinate or defecate in a public place.
(2) No person shall knock over or attempt to knock over a Canada Post mailbox,
Canada Post relay box, newspaper box, blue box or other waste container
located on a highway. This subsection shall not apply to City employees or
any person under contract to the City who is acting under the City's Solid
Waste Management By-law.
Enforcement
3. The provisions of this By-law may be enforced by a police officer or a
Municipal Law Enforcement Offcer appointed under any City by-law or any
other person assigned or appointed by Council of the City of Hamilton to
administer or enforce this By-law and includes a person employed by the City
of Hamilton whose duties are to enforce this By-law.
Page 3 of 3
Penalty
4. Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is guilty of an
offence and on conviction is liable to a fine as provided for in the Provincial
Offences Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.33.
Short Title of By-law
5. This By-law may be referred to as the "Public Nuisance By-law".
Comes into Force
6. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 27th day of May, 2009.
, (
ê~
Mayor



Content from 09111 to repeal bylaw no 06234 a bylaw to regulate restaurant and public halls in the hess village e:
Authority: Item 1, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-015 (PED09127)
CM: May 27,2009
Bil No. 111
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-111
To Repeal By-law No. 06-234, a By-law to Regulate Restaurant and Public Halls in the
Hess Vilage Entertainment District and to Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to
License and Regulate Various Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses being City of
Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for a technical amendment to the General Provisions of City of
Hamilton By-law No. 07-170 respecting the circulation applications for licences and for the
incorporation of City of Hamilton By-law No. 06-234 to regulate Restaurants and Public Halls in the
Hess Vilage Entertainment District into City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 11 of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced by the
following new section 11:
11.(1 )The Issuer of Licences upon receipt of a proper, completed application and payment of fees
for a new licence under this By-law:
(a) shall circulate the application to the departments as marked in the affrmative in
Appendix "A" to this By-law; and
may, in addition, circulate the application to such City or provincial departments or
(b)
agencies as the Issuer of Licences deems necessary, or as directed by CounciL.
(2) The Issuer of Licences upon receipt of a proper, completed application and payment of fees
for the renewal of a licence under this By-law:
(a) shall circulate the application to the departments as marked in the affrmative in
Appendix "B" to this By-law; and
may, in addition, circulate the application to such City or provincial departments or
(b)
agencies as the Issuer of Licences deems necessary, or as directed by CounciL.
(3) Departments or agencies to which the application is provided under subsections (1) or (2),
shall review obtainable information and provide the Issuer of Licences with comments or
compliance reports on whether the information indicates non-compliance with an applicable
law which the department or agency enforces and which applies to the proposed business,
and where an inspection is made, shall provide the Issuer of Licences with a report on any
non-compliance found as a result of that inspection.
(4) Where, under this By-law an applicant or licensee is to be tested, the City department
responsible for the testing shall conduct the test or provide an opportunity for taking the test,
and provide the Issuer of Licences with the test results.
(5) Applicants and licensees, as a condition of obtaining or continuing to hold a licence, shall
permit inspections or inquiries by representatives of the departments or agencies circulated
under subsections (1) and (2) as may be reasonably requested, and shall undertake the tests
referred to in subsection (4).
(6) Fees which are required to be paid for the making of an inspection or the conducting of a test
under subsections (4) and (5) as prescribed in Schedule 31 or the City's User Fees and
Charges By-law may be collected by the Issuer of Licences before a licence is issued or
renewed.
(7) The Issuer of Licences may send notice of the comments or other response from the
departments or agencies received under this section to the applicant or licensee.
2. Paragraph 12(1)(b) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting", By-law 06-234".
3. Section 31 of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by deleting the
sentence "City of Hamilton By-law No. 06-234 is not repealed."
4. The General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 are amended by adding the following new
section 32 after section 31 and renumbering the subsequent sections accordingly:
32. City of Hamilton By-law No. 06-234 is repealed.
5. By-law No. 07-170 is amended by adding the new Schedule 21.1, entitled "Hess Vilage
Entertainment District", attached as Appendix A to this By-law after Schedule 21, entitled
"Restaurant and Food Shops".
6. All decisions made by the Chief of Hamilton Police Services under By-law No. 06-234
shall continue to be current and valid under the new Schedule 21.1 until changed by him
or her under the new Schedule.
7. All fees owed under By-law No. 06-234 shall continue to be owed under the new Schedule
21.1 and are subject to all of the applicable provisions of By-law No. 07-170 and the new
Schedule.
8. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 2th day of May, 2009.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor Acting City Clerk
APPENDIX A
SCHEDULE 21.1
HESS VILLAGE ENTERTAINMENT DISTRICT
PART I: DEFINITIONS
1. In this Schedule:
(a) "food shop" means a food shop under Schedule 21 of this By-law;
"Hess Vilage Entertainment District" means the geographic area in the City
(b)
bordered by Caroline Street to the East, Main Street to the South, Queen Street to the
West and King Street to North as shown in the map attached as Appendix A to this
Schedule;
(c) "place of amusement" means a place of amusement under Schedule 17 of this By-
law;
(d) "public hall" means a public hall under Schedule 17 of this By-law;
(e) "restaurant" means a restaurant under Schedule 21 of this By-law; and
(f) "Special Duty Police Officer" means a police offcer who is a member of Hamilton
Police Services.
PART II: SCOPE
2. This Schedule applies food shop, place of amusement, public halls and restaurant licence
holders whose establishments are located in the Hess Village Entertainment District:
(a) which has the highest concentration, in terms capacity, of bars and nighclubs, many
with outdoor patios, in the City; and
(b) where, from April 15 to October 31 each year there are a large number of individuals
attending such bars and nightclubs resulting in:
significant noise, litter and other nuisances, such as urination in public places in
(i)
and around the Hess Village Entertainment District;
line-ups to enter the bars and nightclubs that pose a safety risk to pedestrian
(ii)
and vehicular traffc, including inhibiting the flow of traffc along Hess Street; and
additional issues related to nuisance and safety resulting from the large number
(iii)
of individuals in attendance and the consumption of alcohol, in particular when
such bars and nightclubs close and these individuals exit en masse.
PART II: DUTIES OF LICENCE HOLDERS
3. Food shop, place of amusement, public halls and restaurant licence holders shall retain a
minimum of ten (10) Special Duty Police Officers for the Hess Vilage Entertainment District
each Thursday, Friday and Saturday from 11 :00 p.m. to 4:00 a.m. beginning April 15 and
ending October 31 each calendar year.
4. Notwithstanding section 3, the Chief of Hamilton Police Services, or his or her designate, may:
(a) change the commencement date of April 15 or the ending date October 31 by giving
forty-eight (48) hours prior notice to each food shop, place of amusement, public halls
and restaurant licence holder;
(b) suspend the requirement to retain Special Duty Police Officers for any day or time
period where he or she decides that such Special Duty Police Officers are not required
for public safety, nuisance control or public protection or where such Special Duty
Police Officers are not available;
(c) after consultation with the Issuer of Licences, increase or decrease the number of
Special Duty Police Officers by giving thirty (30) days prior written notice to each food
shop, place of amusement, public halls and restaurant licence holder.
5. Every food shop, place of amusement, public halls and restaurant licence holder shall
contribute a pro rated share, based on the total capacity of their establishment under their
liquor licence, to the cost of the Special Duty Police Offcers required under section 3, as may
be changed under section 4, and their licence shall be conditional on such contribution being
paid in full in a timely fashion.
6. Every food shop, place of amusement, public halls and restaurant licence holder shall submit
to the Issuer of Licences, when submitting an application to renew their licence or at such
other times as the Issuer of Licences may require, a certificate from Hamilton Police Services
evidencing their compliance with section 5.
Legend
BOUNDARIES
NORTH- KING ST W
EAT - CAROLINE ST S
SOUTH -: MAIN ST W
WEST - QUEEN ST S
306
)
K\NG ST W
215
213
271
235
255
11 12
15 14 13 1
15
'\8
19
4 20 68
17 25 (f
27 ~
29
z
116 U1
::
(f GEORGEST ~
t; 32 5
~
34 35
166
u. 36
34 ~ 117 174
115 38
36 190
Apdi A to Schle 21.1
20
to ByLaw 07-170
220
HESS VILLAGE
222 tJA.\N s"f\N ENTERTAlNtvT I)STRICT
54
..~"3O.m::2
115
191
.."'- Hamilton
~.. f554
ßJNOìlOeCHOCDI-- OI~
i-. ~ ~ 215 :::=::--.M:'w;..~.
~ ~ ~ 217 . 56 '9"N:TA~~I'I1.



Content from 09152 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 3, Board of Health
Report 09-008 (SPH05032(e))
CM: July 9, 2009
Bil No. 152
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-152
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses being City
Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
of
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the replacement of Schedule 20 of City of Hamilton
By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule 20 of By-law Nq. 07-170 is deleted and replaced with the new Schedule 20,
entitled "Residential Care Facilities", attached as Appendix A to this By-law.
2. licences issued under Schedule 20 which are current and valid on the day this By-law
All
comes into force shall be deamed to be:
(a) current and valid under the new Schedule 20; and
(b) subject to all of the applicable provisions of By-law No. 07-170 and the new
Schedule 20, including but not limited to expiring and being renewable as though
they had been issued under the new Schedule 20.
3. All residential care facility operators shall comply with paragraph 5(1 )(d) of Schedule 20
attached as Appendix A by submitting a premises plan to the Issuer of Licences upon
this By-law coming into force and, if a premises plan is not submitted, the Issuer of
Licences may make a recommendation under section 14 of the General Provisions of
By-law No. 07-170.
4. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 9th day of July, 2009.
-
~nson
Chad Collns F..ee E:i':l'~r5e(
Aoting Mayor City Clerk
Appendix A
SCHEDULE 20
RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES
PART I: INTERPRETATION
1. In this Schedule:
(a) "activities of daily living" means the activities of an individual that maintain their
sufficient nutrition, hygiene, warmth, rest and safety;
(b) "additional care" means community services such as long term care services, or
rehabilitative services that can be provided to a tenant either in the residential care
facility or in the community;
(c) "ambulatory" means in respect of an individual, that they are independently mobile, by
mechanical or any other means, or with minimal assistance of another person;
(d) "attic" means the space between the roof and the ceiling of the top storey of a
residential care facility or between a dwarf wall and a sloping roof of a residential care
facility, which is not finished in such a way as to provide suitable habitation for tenants;
(e) "basement" means a storey of a residential care facility located below the first storey
which is more than 50 per cent below grade or which is not finished in such a way as to
provide suitable habitation for tenants;
(f) "care services" means advice, information, or supervision provided to tenants in the
activities of daily living and may also include:
(i) periodic personal care, as required, such as the giving of medications, bathing
assistance, assistance with feeding, incontinence care, dressing assistance,
assistance with personal hygiene, and ambulatory assistance;
(ii) provision of recreational or social activities, housekeeping, laundry services, and
assistance with transportation;
(iii) personal emergency response services, including assistance in evacuating under
emergency conditions due to mental limitations and/or developmental handicaps
and limitations of the tenants;
(g) "drug" means any substance or mixture of substances manufactured, sold or
represented for use in:
(i) the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention of a disease, disorder, abnormal
physical state, or the symptoms thereof, in an individual; or
(ii) restoring, correcting or modifying of organic functions in an individual;
(h) "Guidelines" means the guidelines for the operation of facilities licensed under this
Schedule, which the Medical Offcer of Health is authorized to issue under subsection
57(a);
(i) "long term care facility" means a nursing home under the Nursina Homes Act, an
approved charitable home for the aged under the Charitable Institutions Act or a home
under the Homes for the Aaed and Rest Homes Act provided that on the day the Lonq-
Term Care Homes Act. 2007 comes into force, "long term care facility" means a place
that is licensed under that Act;
U) "Officer" means:
(i) a building inspector of the Building Division of the Planning and Economic
Development Department;
(ii) an inspector of the Fire Department;
(iii) a public health inspector employed in the Public Health Services Department;
(iv) a registered nurse employed in the Public Health Services Department;
(v) an officer appointed by the Issuer of Licences.
(k) "operator" means a person licensed under this Schedule to operate a residential care
facility;
(I) "physician" means a legally qualified medical practitioner;
(m) "prescribed", when used with reference to a drug or mixture of drugs, means that a
legally qualified medical practitioner or a dentist has directed the dispensing of the drug
or mixture of drugs to a named individual;
(n) "prescription drug" means a drug that may be dispensed by a pharmacist only upon
the direction of a physician or dentist;
(0) "rehabilitative services" means services for a person with a physical, mental, or
developmental handicap, and includes,
(i) homemaker services,
(ii) day care,
(iii) training and rehabilitation,
(iv) casework and counselling, and
(v) training in life skills;
(p) "residential care facility" means a residential complex that is occupied or intended to
be occupied by four or more persons for the purpose of receiving care services, whether
or not receiving the services is the primary purpose of the occupancy, and the term
"facility" has a corresponding meaning;
(q) "residential care facility information package" means an information package that
contains the information required to contained in an information package under section
140 of the Residential Tenancies Act. 2006;
(r) "single facility incident" means a situation, or the likelihood of an impending situation,
which could reasonably be expected to have an abnormal effect on the health, safety,
welfare, or personal property of one or more tenants of a facility, and which, because of
its nature or magnitude, requires a controlled and co-ordinated response by the
operator;
(s) "tenant of a facility" means a person, other than an operator or employee, who
(i) resides in a residential care facility, and to whom the operator provides care
services;
(ii) is ambulatory; and
(iii) has decreased physical or mental functional ability;
and the term "tenant" has a corresponding meaning; and
(t) "volunteer" means a person, other than an operator or an employee, who, as part of an
organized volunteer program, provides services or work at a residential care facility for
no wage or salary.
PART II: LICENSING
GENERAL
2. No person shall operate a residential care facility without a licence.
3. A licence shall not be issued for a facility established after October 1, 1980, which is
situated in a location where, at any hour, the noise level exceeds 58 decibels.
4. The authorized capacity of a facility, as determined by the Medical Officer of Health, and the
provisions of the applicable zoning by-laws, shall be endorsed on the licence issued to the
facility.
INFORMATION TO BE PROVIDED BY APPLICANT
5.(1 ) Every applicant for a licence, in addition to complying with the General Provisions of this
By-law, shall submit, before the licence may be issued:
(a) a signed form certifying that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age at the time of
application;
(b) a copy of an Ontario Secondary School Graduation Diploma or evidence satisfactory to the
Issuer of Licences of equivalent standing from the Ontario Ministry of Education and
Training;
(c) evidence satisfactory to the Issuer of Licences of employment experience in work
comparable to the administration of the facility which they propose to operate;
(d) a premises plan of the residential care facility showing all buildings or other structures,
parking areas and walkways on the property where the residential care facility is located
and all entrances/exits, bedrooms, beds, clothes closets, dining areas, sittng rooms and
toilet facilities, sittng rooms in the residential care facility; and
(e) a single facility incident plan satisfactory to the Medical Officer of Health which shall
include the premises plan under paragraph (d).
(2) Paragraph (1 )(b) does not apply to a person who was the holder of a licence to operate
a residential care facility under a by-law of a former area municipality on July 10, 2001,
the date that the City of Hamilton Licensing Code, By-law 01-156, came into force.
6. Every applicant for a licence or a licence renewal, in addition to complying with the General
Provisions of this By-law, shall submit to the Issuer of Licences before the licence is issued
or renewed, the following:
(a) upon applying for a licence and every third year thereafter, upon applying for a licence
renewal, a certificate from the Electrical Safety Authority that the facility complies with
the Ontario Electrical Safety Code;
(b) a certificate from the Medical Officer of Health, that the facility complies with the health
and safety standards in this Schedule;
(c) a certificate from the insurer of the facility, that the insurance coverage required under
subsection 12(i) of this Schedule is in effect for the facility; and
(d) documentation as required under section 14 as to the age and education of the
operator's employees.
7. Every applicant for a licence renewal, in addition to complying with the General Provisions
of this By-law, shall submit to the Issuer of Licence before the licence is renewed an
updated single facility incident plan satisfactory to the Medical Officer of Health.
8. Where the applicant for a licence or for a licence renewal is a corporation or a partnership,
at least one officer or director of the corporation or one partner of the partnership shall
submit, in respect of themselves, the certificates or other documents required to be
submitted by an individual under the General Provisions of this By-law or under this
Schedule.
9. Every operator shall advise the Issuer of Licences immediately in writing of any change to the
information required to be filed in respect of their licence under the General Provisions of this
By-law or this Schedule.
EXPIRATION
10. No licence issued under this Schedule is transferable.
11. Where:
by a transfer of existing shares, by an issue of new or existing shares, or by some
(a)
other means, the controlling interest in a corporation holding a licence is determined
by the Issuer of Licences to have changed hands; or
(b) one or more partner in a partnership holding a licence is determined by the Issuer of
Licences to have ceased to be a partner qr the partnership is determined by the Issuer
of Licences to have ceased to exist,
a licence issued under this Schedule shall be deemed to have expired.
PART II: OPERATOR
GENERAL
12. The operator shall:
(a) ensure that the provisions of this Schedule, including the Guidelines, are complied with;
(b) provide a certificate from the Electrical Safety Authority that the facility complies with the
Ontario Electrical Safety Code as required by the Issuer of Licences;
(c) keep a copy of the single facility incident plan in the facility in a readily accessible
location;
(d) ensure that there are no firearms and no prohibited or restricted weapons, as set out in
federal statutes, regulations, Orders in Councilor otherwise by the federal government,
kept in the facility;
(e) ensure that access to a telephone is available within the facility;
(i) for employees and volunteers; and
(ii) in a private setting for tenants of the facility;
(f) post in a conspicuous place in the facility:
(i) the current licence for the facility;
(ii) a notice stating the name of the operator or an employee who is present at the
facility and has the primary duty of supervising the tenants as required under
paragraph 17(2)(a);
(iii) a notice stating the operator's name, address and telephone number, and the name,
address and telephone number of the employee who has been designated under
paragraph 17(2)(a);
(iv) a notice stating the operator is licensed by the City of Hamilton and that a complaint
about the operation of the facility may be made by telephoning the City of Hamilton
at 905-546-2063;
(v) rules for the conduct of employees and tenants of the facility;
(vi) a notice of the collection of personal information in a form approved by the Issuer of
Licences which contains:
1. the legal authority for the collection of personal information about tenants and
employees of the facility by Officers;
2. the principal purpose or purposes for which the personal information is intended
to be used; and
3. the title, business address and business telephone number of an offcer or
employee of the City who can answer questions from individual tenants and
employees of the facility about the collection of their personal information;
(g) comply with all applicable access to information and protection of privacy legislation;
(h) ensure that the authorized capacity of the facility is not exceeded; and
(i) ensure that a policy of commercial general liability insurance, including coverage for
bodily injury and property damage resulting from the operation of the facility, with an
inclusive limit of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000) per claim or occurrence, is in
force at all times when one or more tenants is present in the facility.
EMPLOYEES AND VOLUNTEERS
13.(1) The operator shall give every employee and volunteer a notice of the collection of
information in a form approved by the Issuer of Licences and the Medical Officer of
Health which describes the procedures under this Schedule for the collection of personal
information about employees and volunteers, at the time when an individual commences
employment or volunteering at the facility.
(2) The notice under subsection (1) shall also contain:
(a) the legal authority for the collection of personal information about employees or
volunteers by Officers;
(b) the principal purpose or purposes for which the personal information is intended to
be used; and
(c) the title, business address, and business telephone number of an officer or
employee of the City who can answer questions from an employee of or a volunteer
at the facility about the collection of the employee's or volunteer's personal
information.
(3) Where the operator has not given an employee or volunteer a notice under subsection (1),
the operator shall give the employee or volunteer a letter in a form approved by the Issuer
of Licences and the Medical Offcer of Health which contains the information set out in
subsections (1) and (2), within seven days after being directed to do so by the Issuer of
Licences.
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the operator shall give a notice of the collection of personal
information to an employee or volunteer within seven days after being directed to do so by
an Offcer.
14. The operator shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Issuer of Licences, within seven
days after an employee commences employment, that the employee:
(a)(i) is sixteen years of age but less than eighteen years of age; or
(ii) eighteen years of age or older;
(b) if the employee is eighteen years of age or older;
has an Ontario Secondary School Certificate, or equivalent standing; or
(i)
(ii) employment experience, satisfactory to the Issuer of Licences, in
comparable work;
whose duties require communication with the tenants, is able to communicate
(c)
clearly and effectively with the tenants.
15.(1) The operator shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Issuer of Licences within thirty
days after an employee commences employment that the employee has successfully
completed of the new staff in-service orientation training as described in the Guidelines.
(2) Where an employee's duties involve the supervision of tenants, the operator shall
provide evidence satisfactory to the Issuer of Licences within thirty days of each six
month period after the employee commences employment that the employee has
successfully completed at least five hours of continuing education as described in the
Guidelines.
16. The operator shall provide evidence satisfactory to the Issuer of Licences, within seven
days after an employee commences employment or a volunteer commences
volunteering, that the employee or volunteer has had a negative TB test not more than
thirty days before commencing employment or volunteering.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR OPERATION AND SUPERVISION
17.(1) In this section "employee" means an employee who is eighteen years of age or older.
(2) The operator shall ensure that:
(a) one employee is designated as the individual responsible for the operation of the
facility and can be contacted immediately at the telephone number posted for
that employee under subsection 12(f) at any time when the operator cannot be
contacted immediately at the telephone number posted for the operator under
subsection 12(f);and
(b) at all times, the operator or an employee is present at the facility who has the
primary duty of supervising the tenants and is able to carry out this duty without
interference, including but not limited to any interference caused by other duties
or by distractions.
OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
Water Supply
18. The operator shall ensure that there is an adequate supply of potable and of hot water:
(a) which can provide at least 227.303 litres (50 gallons) for each tenant and employee, per
day;
(b) of at least .362 kilograms pressure per square centimetre (8 pounds per square inch),
when a fixture is in use; and
(c) for water serving all bath tubs, showers and hand basins used by tenants, of a
temperature of not more than 49° Centigrade (120° Fahrenheit) and controlled by a
device, inaccessible to the tenants, that regulates the temperature.
Bedrooms and Storage
19. The operator shall ensure that:
(a) a bedroom for a tenant or tenants in a facility established before October 1, 1980
provides a minimum of 16.8 cubic meters (600 cubic feet) of air space and 6.96 square
meters (75 square feet) of floor space for each tenant;
(b) a bedroom for a tenant or tenants in a facility constructed, renovated, added to or altered
on or after June 1, 1980 provides a minimum, exclusive of the space provided for built-in
or portable clothes closets, of:
(i) 10.22 square meters (110 square feet) of floor space in a single-bed unit, provided
that this area may be reduced to 9.30 square meters (100 square feet) where the
facility provides a living room and one or more dining area;
floor space in a two-bed unit;
(ii) 16.72 square meters (180 square feet) of
(iii) 25.08 square meters (270 square feet) of floor space in a three-bed unit;
(iv) 29.73 square meters (320 square feet) of floor space in a four-bed unit;
(c) a bedroom for more than one tenant shall be arranged so that all beds are at least .91
meters (3 feet) apart;
(d) a bedroom for one or more tenants:
(i) has one or more windows to the outside that:
1. except where another means of ventilation is provided, can be opened to provide
an open area of at least 5% of the floor area of the room;
2. is not less in total area than 10% of the floor area of the room; and
3. is screened from May 1 to October 31 ;
(ii) is not to be part of a lobby, hallway, passageway, closet, bathroom, stairway,
basement, attc, kitchen, storage room, boiler room, laundry room, activity room
utility room, chapel, sitting room, administrative office, or tenant examination room;
(e) a bedroom is provided with a door;
(f) every bed provided for a tenant of a facility is of a minimum width of 91.44 centimetres
(36 inches);
(g) a bedroom in a facility in respect of which a licence was not issued under a by-law of a
former area municipality on July 10, 2001, the date that the City of Hamilton Licensing
Code, By-law 01-156, came into force, does not contain more than two beds;
(h) where more than one bed is located in a bedroom, a moveable partition is provided
between the beds to ensure the privacy of each tenant, unless the tenants who occupy
the bedroom jointly inform the operator that they do not require such a partition;
(i) sufficient clean towels, face cloths and bed linen are provided for use of the tenants of a
facility, with a supply of such linen:
(i) available at all times in the facility: and
(ii) changed at least one a week;
U) a clothes closet is provided for each tenant in their bedroom;
(k) secure storage space, no less than .15 m3 in size and accessible only to the tenant and
the operator, is provided for each tenant; and
(i) a rack on which to hang towels and face cloths is provided for each tenant.
Dining Area
20. The operator shall ensure that one or more dining areas is provided, with a minimum floor
space of 1.85 square meters (20 square feet) per tenant and capable of accommodating at
least one half of the authorized capacity of the facility at one time.
Sitting Rooms
21. The operator shall ensure that:
(a) one or more sitting rooms is provided within each facility;
(b) the minimum total space for a sitting room shall be the greater of:
(i) an area equal to 1.39 square meters (15 square feet) of floor space for each tenant;
or
(ii) 11.148 square meters (120 square feet).
Toilet Facilities
22. The operator shall ensure that:
(a) a toilet room or bathroom are not within, or open directly into, any dining room, kitchen,
pantry, food preparation room, or storage room;
(b) a toilet is not located within a bedroom;
(c) toilet facilities are provided in at least the following ratios:
(i) for an authorized capacity of four to seven tenants: one wash basin, one flush toilet,
and one bath tub or shower;
(ii) for an authorized capacity of a fraction of seven tenants beyond the first seven: one
wash basin and one flush toilet; and
(iii) for an authorized capacity of each additional seven tenants beyond the first seven:
one wash basin, one flush toilet, and one bath tub or shower;
(d) a bathroom, toilet, or shower room is provided with a door and a lock which is of a type
that can be readily released from the outside in case of an emergency;
(e) one bathroom toilet and shower room shall be of a type that is suitable for use by
persons confined to wheelchairs, where one or more such persons have been admitted
to the facility as tenants;
(f) the bottom of each bath tub is furnished with non-skid material; and
(g) each bath tub and each toilet is furnished with at least one grab bar or similar device of
a type that will ensure the safety of tenants.
Waste
23. The operator shall ensure that waste is stored in receptacles which are:
(i) insect and rodent-proof;
(ii) water-tight;
(iii) provided with a tight-fitting cover; and
(iv) kept clean.
Lighting
24. The operator shall ensure that lighting of the exterior and interior of the facility complies with
ANSIIIESNA RP-28-07 (the "Recommended Practice for Lighting and the Visual
Environment for Senior Living" approved by the Iluminating Engineering Society of North
America) as amended or replaced from time to time.
Ventilation
25. The operator shall ensure that every room shall be adequately ventilated by natural or
mechanical means and shall be so designed and installed that it meets the applicable
requirements of the Ontario Building Code.
Ramps and Stairways
26. The operator shall ensure that guard, handrail and slip-resistance requirements for ramps
and stairways shall be so designed and installed that they meet the applicable requirements
of the Ontario Building Code.
Floors
27. The operator shall ensure that non-skid finishes and coverings are installed on every floor.
Balconies
28. The operator shall ensure that balustrades for balconies shall be so designed and installed
that they meet the applicable requirements of the Ontario Building Code.
Construction and Zoning
29. The operator shall ensure that:
(a) no construction, renovation, addition or alteration of a facility is carried out, except in
compliance with this Schedule, ANSI/IESNA RP-28-07 as amended or repaced from
time to time, the Ontario Building Code, the Ontario Fire Code, and under a valid
building permit; and
(a) the applicable zoning by-laws are complied with.
30. The operator:
(a) shall submit to the Issuer of Licences an operational plan, addressing the operation of
their facility during construction, renovation, addition or alteration, a minimum of 90 days
before commencing such construction, renovation, addition or alternation; and
(b) shall not commence construction, renovation, addition or alteration of a facility until the
Issuer of Licences has given them written approval of the operational plan submitted
under subsection (a).
General Health and Safety
31. The operator shall ensure that:
(a) the facility is kept in a clean and sanitary condition, including but not limited to providing
for professional pest control as needed;
(b) the facility is free from hazards to the safety of tenants of the faciliy, employees,
volunteers or visitors;
(c) the facility is supplied with heat in accordance with City of Hamilton By-law 04-091 with
respect to the supply of adequate and suitable heat for rental residential premises;
(d) all food storage, preparation and service areas meet the requirements of the Food
Premises Regulation under the Health Protection and Promotion Act; and
(e) the facility meets all requirements of the Building Code under the Buildinq Code Act,
1992 and of the Fire Code under the Fire Protection and Prevention Act, 1997.
PART IV: ADMISSION OF TENANTS
32.(1) The operator shall give every individual a notice of the collection of personal information
in a form approved by the Issuer of Licences and the Medical Officer of Health which
describes the procedures under this Schedule for the collection of personal information
about tenants before obtaining an assessment of the individual under section 33.
(2) The notice under subsection (1) shall also contain:
(a) the legal authority for the collection of personal information about tenants by
inspectors;
(b) the principal purpose or purposes for which the personal information is intended to
be used; and
(c) the title, business address, and business telephone number of an officer or
employee of the City who can answer questions from a tenant of the facility about
the collection of his or her personal information.
(3) Where the operator has not given a individual the notice under subsection (1) and the
individual has been admitted as a tenant, the operator shall give the individual a letter in a
form approved by the Issuer of Licences and the Medical Offcer of Health, which contains
the information set out in subsections (1) and (2), within seven days after being directed to
do so by the Issuer of Licences.
(4) Notwithstanding subsection (1), the operator shall give a notice of the collection of personal
information to a tenant within seven days after being directed to do so by a registered nurse
employed in the Public Health Services Department.
33.(1) Prior to admitting an individual as a tenant of a facility, the operator shall obtain an up-to-
date assessment from a physician or other member of a regulated health profession
employed by a referring agency designated in the Guidelines, which provides an opinion
as to the level of care services the individual requires.
(2) An operator shall determine on the basis of the assessment referred to in subsection (1),
and the criteria for admission set forth in the Guidelines, whether the level of care
services which is provided in the home is adequate to meet the individual's needs in
relation to the activities of daily living.
34. An operator shall not admit an individual as a tenant who is not ambulatory, who for the
protection of themselves or others requires placement in a locked unit or who requires a
level of care services which the operator is not authorized to provide in the facility,
except in accordance with the Guidelines.
35. An operator shall not admit an individual as a tenant without:
(a) their consent; or
(b) the consent in writing of their next-of-kin, or attorney for personal care, as the case
may be, if the individual has been declared mentally or physically incapable of
giving consent.
36. The operator shall enter into a written tenancy agreement with each individual who is
admitted as a tenant of the facility and shall give each such individual a residential care
facility information package prior to entering into the tenancy agreement.
PART V: CARE SERVICES
37. The operator shall provide care services to each tenant in a facility in accordance with the
Guidelines.
DRUGS
38. The operator shall ensure that all prescription drugs:
(a) are kept in one or more locked drug cabinets, unless the drug requires refrigeration, or
must be kept with the tenant for immediate use; and
(b) are made available only:
a physician;
(i) to those tenants for whom they have been prescribed, as directed by
(ii) in a unit-dose medication dispensing system as described in the Guidelines.
39. The operator shall allow self-medication by the tenants of a facility under specified
conditions set out in the Guidelines.
40. If a tenant is prescribed a drug that is a controlled substance as defined in the Controlled
DruQs and Substances Act (Canada) and the operator has not completed a medication
course as described in the Guidelines within the preceding twelve months, then they shall
complete such a medication course no more than thirty days after the drug has been
prescribed.
NUTRITIONAL CARE
41. The operator shall ensure that the tenants of a facility are served daily sufficient food of
good quality and adequate nutritional and caloric value as described in the Guidelines.
INFECTION CONTROL
42. The operator shall ensure that all requirements for the control of infectious diseases that are
set forth in Guidelines are complied with, including recommendations for tuberculosis
screening, immunization programs, reporting requirements, and outbreak control measures.
MEDICAL CARE
43.(1) Each tenant of a facility or their next-of-kin, or attorney for personal care, as the case
may be, shall arrange for emergency medical care for the tenant, as required.
(2) Where the tenant, their next-of-kin, or attorney for personal care is unable to arrange for
emergency medical care, or where such emergency medical care is unavailable, the
operator shall arrange for emergency medical care for the tenant.
44. The operator shall allow a tenant's physician or a member of a regulated health professional
who is providing care or treatment to a tenant to enter the facility at any reasonable time for
the purpose of attending to the health of the tenant.
ADDITIONAL CARE
45.(1) Wherever the tenant's physician, the operator, the Medical Officer of Health, or a member
of a regulated health profession who is employed by a referring agency designated in
the Guidelines, determines that a tenant requires additional care services for their
special needs and the tenant, their next-of-kin, or attorney for personal care has not
arranged for such additional care, the operator shall ensure that such additional care is
made available to the tenant while the tenant continues to reside in the facility.
(2) In ensuring that additional care services are provided under subsection (1), the operator
shall:
(a) consult with the tenant, their next-of-kin, attorney for personal care and/or a
community worker, and prepare a plan which shall include a description of the health
issue and the services being provided to address that health issue and which may
include additional care services, such as additional personal care services and/or
rehabilitative services;
(b) ensure that additional personal care services are provided through a referral to a
community care access centre or to a private community agency;
(c) where the tenant requires rehabilitative services, support the tenant's rehabilitative
goals in the facility and in the community, which may include assisting tenant with
meal preparation, laundry, household duties and self-medication.
46. The operator or the employee designated under paragraph 17(2)(a), shall inform the tenant,
as soon as possible, of the provisions of section 148 of the Residential Tenancies Act. 2006
and may arrange for the transfer of the tenant:
(a) to a long term care facility or other appropriate living arrangement, with the agreement of
the tenant, where an operator is informed by:
a community care access centre that a tenant of a facility is eligible for admission
(i)
to a long term care facility;
the tenant's physician or the Medical Officer of Health, that the tenant no longer
(ii)
requires the level of care services which the facility is authorized to provide; or
the tenant's physician or the Medical Officer of Health, that the tenant requires a
(iii)
level of care services that the operator is not authorized to provide; or
(b) to a long term care facility, with the agreement of the tenant, where a tenant requires
placement in a locked unit for the protection of themselves or others.
47. Where a facility has a locked unit the operator shall:
(a) ensure that none of the facility's tenants who are not in the locked unit are moved
into it;
(b) make every reasonable attempt to transfer tenants in the locked unit to a long term
care facility and to close the locked unit no more than two years from July 9, 2009.
48.( 1) Where a tenant is transferred from a residential care facility to a long term care facility or
to another facility licensed under this By-law, the operator shall request the tenant, or, if
they are unable to act, their next-of-kin or attorney for personal care, to complete an
authorization in Form 1 for the release of information pertaining to the tenant to the long
term care facility or other licensed residential care facility.
(2) Where a tenant is transferred from a residential care facility to another facility licensed
under this By-law, or to a hospital, the operator shall complete a transfer in Form 2.
PART VI: RECORDS AND REPORTS
49.(1) The operator shall maintain an up-to-date, alphabetical list of the tenants of a facility
which includes the name, sex, date of birth, age and date of admission of each tenant.
(2) The operator shall maintain a separate file for each tenant, which contains the following
information:
(a) sex, date of birth, age, date of admission and date of discharge or death;
(b) name, address and telephone number of next-of-kin;
(c) name and telephone number of the tenant's attorney for personal care, if any;
(d) the name and telephone number of the tenant's physicians;
(e) completed assessment;
(f) the name, address and telephone number of any community agency which is
providing support to the tenant;
(g) tuberculin or chest x-ray testing results, and the dates thereof;
(h) a brief medical history of the tenant, in respect of the care services provided by the
operator under the tenancy agreement (section 36) or any additional care services
made available by the operator (subsection 45( 1)), from the date of their admission,
including medication information, laboratory results, physicians' orders and staff
notes or other records necessary to determining the level of care services provided;
(i) a residential care facility information package;
U) particulars of each accident suffered by the tenant while in the facility; and
(k) any completed Form 1, Form 2 or Form 3.
50. The operator shall make a record in Form 3 of every occurrence with respect to a tenant of
assault, injury or of death that has been reported to coroner, and shall place the completed
Form 3 in the tenant's file and keep it available for inspection by the Medical Officer of
Health.
51. The operator shall ensure that any document or other record of any kind which contains
personal information about a tenant, other than the personal information described in
subsections 49(1) and (2) and section 50, is maintained in a file which is separate from the
file which is maintained pursuant to subsection 49(2) or any other provisions of this
Schedule or the Guidelines.
52. The operator shall ensure that any document or other record of any kind which contains
personal information about the performance of duties by an employee of their facility, other
than personal information described in sections 14, 15 and 16 and subsections 12(f), is
maintained in a file which is separate from the file which is maintained pursuant to the
provisions of this Schedule or the Guidelines.
53. The operator shall ensure that documents or records which are kept pursuant to this
Schedule or the Guidelines are kept for at least one year after the tenant, employee or
volunteer ceases to be a tenant, employee or volunteer respectively.
PART VII: INSPECTION AND ENFORCEMENT
54.(1 ) The Medical Officer of Health, the General Manager of Planning and Economic
Development, the Chief Fire Prevention Officer, the Chief of the City of Hamilton Police,
the Issuer of Licences, or an Officer, at all reasonable times, may inspect any facility and
the list of tenants req uired by subsection 49( 1 ).
(2) The Medical Officer of Health or a member of a regulated health profession authorized
by them, at all reasonable times, may inspect the file of any tenant required by
subsection 49(2).
55. The operator shall allow the Medical Officer of Health or a member of a regulated health
profession authorized by them, as often as they deem reasonably necessary, to make
inspections of the facility and its operation in order to determine compliance with this
Schedule.
56. The Medical Officer of Health, the Issuer of Licences, the General Manager of Planning and
Development and the Chief Fire Prevention Officer are authorized to enforce the provisions
of this Schedule which are within their respective jurisdiction, and to serve such notices and
make and serve such orders as may be necessary to ensure compliance by the operator.
57. The Medical Officer of Health may:
(a) issue Guidelines for the operation of facilities licensed under this By-Law, including any
matters relating to the health, safety, and well-being of the tenants of a facility, and shall
provide a copy of any such Guidelines and any subsequent additions or revisions to the
operator of each facility licensed under this By-Law;
(b) prescribe the format and content of any forms or other documents required under this
Schedule;
(c) designate the referring agencies which may employ a member of a regulated health
profession for the purposes of making an assessment under subsection 33( 1) and
making a determination under subsection 45(1).



Content from 09153 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272pdf:
Authority: Item 9, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 09-008;
CM: May 13, 2009
Bil No. 153
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-153
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the
Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of May, 2009 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 9 of Audit and Administration Committee Report 09-
008 and did approve the Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy described
therein;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to amend The Sanitary Surcharge and
Wastewater Abatement By-law to implement the said Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is further amended by
adding the following new sub-section (d.3) immediately after sub-section
1(d.2):
(d.3) "City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy" means the policy approved by the Council of the
City of Hamilon at its meeting of May 13, 2009 as Item 9 of the
Audit and Administration Committee Report 09-008, as amended or
re-enacted from time to time, and any successor to such policy.
This policy may be found at the Office of the City Clerk for the City
of Hamilton.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the Consecutive
Estimated Accounts Policy
Page 2 of 3
2. Sub-section (i) of section 1 of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed
and the following sub-section substituted:
"General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services" means the
(i)
General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services for the City of
Hamilton or the person duly authorized to act in his or her stead.
3. All references in By-law No. 03-272, as amended, to the "General
Manager of Corporate Services" are amended by striking out each
reference and by substituting in each case "General Manager of Finance
and Corporate Services".
4. Sub-section 5(c) of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
following sub-section 5(c) substituted:
(c) Where a water meter fails to record properly, the person or persons
liable to pay the Sanitary Surcharge based on metered water rates
are liable to pay such Sanitary Surcharge on the water rate for an
amount of water estimated on the basis of a corresponding period
in the immediately preceding year, or, where the water user did not
occupy the same property for the same period during the
corresponding period in the previous year, then such person or
persons are liable to pay such Sanitary Surcharge on the water rate
for an amount of water based on a similar period of the current
year, or where that is not applicable, then the person or persons
are liable for such Sanitary Surcharge based on the applicable
minimum charge for water imposed by the City under the
Waterworks By-law. Where the City is unable to obtain water meter
data for the actual amount of water supplied to a property, the
water user will be liable to pay the Sanitary Surcharge on the
metered or non-metered water rates for the estimated amounts of
water supplied to the property as set out in the City of Hamilton
Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy.
Should the General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services,
or any other body acting on behalf of the General Manager of
Finance and Corporate Services under an agreement with the City,
subsequently receive the water meter data on the amount of water
actually supplied to the property by the City, the amount billed to
such person or persons will be subsequently adjusted to reflect the
actual amount of water supplied to the property, where such actual
amount is greater than the estimated amounts invoiced, and the
person or persons shall be liable for the resulting adjusted Sanitary
Surcharge on the adjusted water rate.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement
By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the Consecutive
Estimated Accounts Policy
Page 3 of 3
5. This by-law shall come into force on the day it is passed.
6. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 9th day of July, 2009.
.... ..~~
~
~nson -
Chad CoilinG Fre Eise('be(~ ~
i'.cting Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09154 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 9, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 09-008
CM: May 13, 2009
Bil No. 154
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-154
To Amend the Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended,
And Implement the Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by-law
respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of The
Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water rates
and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilon Act, 1999, S.D. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved on
January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilon Act, 1999, S.D. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall be
Municipality
deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS on the 13th day of May, 2009, the Council of the City of Hamilton
did approve of Item 9 of Audit and Administration Committee Report 09-008 and did
approve the Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy described therein;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to amend By-law R84-026 to implement the said
Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law R84-026, as amended, is further amended by adding the
following new sub-section (c.3) immediately after sub-section 1(c.2):
(c.3) "City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy" means the policy approved by the Council of the City
of Hamilton at its meeting of May 13, 2009 as Item 9 of the Audit and
Administration Committee Report 09-008, as amended or re-enacted
To Amend the Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended,
And Implement the Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy
Page 2 of 3
from time to time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may
be found at the Offce of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton.
2. Sub-sections 12(11) and (12) of By-law R84-026, as amended, are repealed
and the following new sub-sections (11) and (12) substituted:
Where the Owner or Occupant of the lands with an existing water
(11 )
meter refuses to permit the installation of a remote reading device by
the City, the Owner or the Occupant of the lands shall pay for the
estimated amounts of water supplied to the property based on
metered or non-metered rates as set out in the City of Hamilton Water
and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy, until such
time as a remote reading device is installed by the City. Should the
General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services, or any other
body acting on behalf of the General Manager of Finance and
Corporate Services under an agreement with the City of Hamilton,
subsequently receive the water meter data on the amount of water
actually supplied to the property by the City of Hamilton, the amount
biled to such person or persons wil be subsequently adjusted to
reflect the actual amount of water supplied to the property, where such
actual amount is greater than the estimated amounts invoiced, and the
person or persons shall be liable for the resulting adjusted water rate.
(12) Where,
(a) the Owner or Occupant of the lands with an existing water
meter refuses to allow access by the City of Hamilton to the
water meter or water meter equipment, including but not limited
to the remote reading device, for inspection or servicing; or
(b) the City of Hamilton is otherwise unable to access the water
meter or water meter equipment, including but not limited to the
removed reading device, and obtain water meter data on the
amount of water actually supplied to the property,
the Owner or the Occupant of the lands shall pay for the estimated
amounts of water supplied to the property based on metered or non-
metered rates as set out in the City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater
Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy until such time as the City of
Hamilton is able to obtain the water meter data on the amount of water
actually supplied to the property. Should the General Manager of
Finance and Corporate Services, or any other body acting on behalf
of the General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services under an
agreement with the City of Hamilton, subsequently receive the water
meter data on the amount of water actually supplied to the property by
the City, the amount billed to such person or persons will be
subsequently adjusted to reflect the actual amount of water supplied to
the property, where such actual amount is greater than the estimated
To Amend the Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended,
And Implement the Consecutive Estimated Accounts Policy
Page 3 of 3
amounts invoiced, and the person or persons shall be liable for the
resulting adjusted water rate.
3. Sub-section 13(5) of By-law R84-026, as amended, is repealed and the
following substituted:
(5) In the event of a water meter failing to record properly, the person or
persons liable to pay the metered water rates are liable to pay the
same for an amount of water estimated on the basis of a
corresponding period in the immediately preceding year, or, where the
water user did not occupy the same premises for the same period
during the corresponding period in the previous year, then on the basis
of a similar period in the current year, or where that is not applicable,
then the water user is liable for the applicable minimum charge set
forth in Schedule "G" to this By-law. Should the General Manager of
Finance and Corporate Services, or any other body acting on behalf
of the General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services under an
agreement with the City of Hamilton, subsequently receive the water
meter data on the amount of water actually supplied to the property by
the City, the amount biled to such person or persons will be
subsequently adjusted to reflect the actual amount of water supplied to
the property, where such actual amount is greater than the estimated
amounts invoiced, and the person or persons shall be liable for the
resulting adjusted water rate.
4. This by-law shall come into force on the day it is passed.
5. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 9th day of July, 2009.
~~-
evin C. Christenson
Acting Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09156 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 15, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report: 09-015 (PED08117(a))
CM: July 9, 2009
Bil No. 156
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-156
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses being
City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for housekeeping and technical amendments to
the General Provisions of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. The following new subsection 4(6) is added after subsection 4(5) of the
General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170:
4(6)(a) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of this By-law that
apply to an applicant for a licence that is:
(i) a partnership, the Issuer of Licences may issue a licence to a
partnership provided that at least one partner, or other
individual affilated with the partnership as determined by the
Issuer of Licences, satisfies such applicable provisions;
a corporation, the Issuer of Licences may issue a licence to a
(ii)
corporation proved that at least one director, officer, or other
individual affilated with the corporation as determined by the
Issuer of Licences, satisfies such applicable provisions.
(b) Paragraph (a) does not apply to Schedules 1, 4 or 25.
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 2 of 6
2. Subsection 14(7) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted.
3. The following new sections 26a. and 26b. are added after section 26 of the
General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170:
26a.(1) A person assigned to enforce this By-law may enter on land at any
reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an inspection to
determine whether or not the following are being complied with:
(a) this By-Law;
(b) a direction or order made under this By-Law;
(c) a condition of a licence issued under this By-Law; or
(d) an order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
(2)A person assigned to enforce this By-law may, for the purposes of the
inspection under subsection (1):
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things
relevant to the inspection;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection
for the purpose of making copies or extracts;
(c) require information in writing or otherwise as required by the person
assigned to enforce this By-law from any person concerning a
matter related to the inspection; or
(d) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert
knowledge, make examinations or take tests, samples or
photographs necessary for the purposes of the inspection.
(3) A person assigned to enforce this By-law may undertake an inspection
pursuant to an order issued by a provincial judge or justice of the peace
under section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001 where he or she has been
prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying out an inspection
under subsections (1) and (2).
(4) If a person assigned to enforce this By-law is satisfied that a
contravention of this By-Law has occurred, he or she may make an
order requiring the person who contravened the By-Law or who caused
or permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of the property
on which the contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening
activity.
(5) An order under subsection (4) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
2
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 3 of 6
contravention and the location of the property on which the
contravention occurred; and
(b) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
(6) If a person assigned to enforce this By-law is satisfied that a
contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may make an order
requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on
which the contravention occurred to do work to correct the
contravention.
(7) An order under subsection (6) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of property on which the
contravention occurred;
(b) the work to be completed; and
(c) the date or dates by which the work must be complete.
(8) An order to discontinue contravening activity made under subsection
(4) or an order to do work made under subsection (6) may be served
personally or by registered mail to the last known address of:
(a) the owner or occupier of the property where the contravention
occurred; and
(b) such other persons affected by it as person assigned to enforce this
By-law making the order determines.
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place five
business days after the date of mailng.
(9) In addition to service given in accordance with subsection (8), an order
to discontinue contravening activity made under subsection (4) or an
order to do work made under subsection (6) may be served by a person
assigned to enforce this By-law by placing a placard containing the
order in a conspicuous place on the property where the contravention
occurred.
(10)Where service cannot be given in accordance with subsection (8),
sufficient service is deemed to have taken place when given in
3
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 4 of 6
accordance with subsection (9).
(11)Where a person does not comply with a direction or a requirement,
including an order, under this By-Law to do a matter or thing, the Issuer
of Licences, with such assistance by others as may be required, may
carry out such direction or requirement at the person's expense.
(12) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under
subsection (11) by action or by adding the costs to the tax roll and
collecting them in the same manner as property taxes and such costs
shall include an interest rate of 15 per cent commencing on the day the
City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs, including the
interest, are paid in full.
(13) The Issuer of Licences is authorized to give immediate effect to any
direction or requirement where the costs of carrying out the direction or
requirement do not exceed $10,000 and, where the costs do exceed
$10,000, as the City's Council may authorize.
26b. Pursuant to Section 431 of the Municipal Act. 2001, when a person has
been convicted of an offence under this By-Law, any court of competent
jurisdiction may, in addition to any other penalty or other remedy
imposed, make an order prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the
offence.
4. Subsection 27(2) is deleted and replaced with the following new subsection
27(2):
27(2)Every person, including every person who fails to comply with an
order made under section 26a., who contravenes this By-law, except
Schedules 1 and 4, and every director or officer of a corporation who
concurs in such contravention by the corporation is upon conviction,
guilty of an offence and liable to a fine not exceeding $25,000.
5. Section 3 of Schedule 3 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by deleting the
word "bread" and replacing it with "bed".
4
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 5 of 6
6. Section 13 of Schedule 10 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced by
the following new section 13:
13. The operator shall ensure that all buildings and structures in the
mobile home park, including but not limited to all mobile homes, meet
all requirements of the Fire Code under the Fire Protection and
Prevention Act. 1997.
7. Subsection 4(f) of Schedule 12 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced
by the following new subsection 4(f):
4(f) shall sell goods, wares or merchandise out-of-doors without written
permission from the property owner of commercially-zoned lands within the
City.
8. Sections 29 and 30 of Schedule 18 of By-law No. 07-170 are deleted and
replaced by the following new section 29 and the following sections are
renumbered accordingly:
29. The operator shall ensure that all buildings and structures in a
recreational camping establishment meet all requirements of the Fire
Code under the Fire Protection and Prevention Act. 1997.
9. The following new phrase is added to Paragraph 8(c)(ii) of Schedule 19 of
By-law No. 07-170 after "public park":
with the separation distance of 100 meters (328 feet) being measured from any
point on a property line of the parcel of land containing the refreshment vehicle
in any direction and in a straight line to the nearest point on a property line of
the parcel of land containing the eating establishment, school ground,
recreation ground, playground or public park;
10. Subsection 37(2) of Schedule 29 of By-law No. 07-170 is amend by deleting
the word "hose" and replacing it with "whose".
5
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses
Page 6 of 6
11. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 9th day of July, 2009.
!!G~;- ~=
__'r
Acting Mayor City Clerk
6



Content from 09170 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate certain businessespdf:
Item 3, Board of Health
Authority:
Report 09-008 (SPH05032(e))
CM: July 9, 2009
Bil No. 170
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-170
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses being City
of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS By-law No. 09-152 deleting and replacing Schedule 20 of City of Hamilton
By-law No. 07-170 was enacted on July 9,2009;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the re-enactment of Schedule 20 of City of
Hamilton By-law No. 07-170 as it read immediately before By-law No. 09-152 was enacted;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
.. 1. Schedule 20 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced with Schedule 20 as it
read immediately before By-law No. 09-152 was enacted on July 9, 2009 (the "re-
enacted Schedule 20").
2. All licences issued under Schedule 20 which are current and valid on the day this
By-law comes into force shall be deemed to be:
(a) current and valid under the re-enacted Schedule 20; and
(b) subject to all of the applicable provisions of By-law No. 07-170 and the re-
enacted Schedule 20, including but not limited to expiring and being
renewable as though they had been issued under the re-enacted Schedule
20.
3. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED and ENACTED this 13th day of August, 2009.
~n:
-4
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09190 to repeal bylaw no 05322 and requiring the supply of vital servicespdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-190
VITAL SERVICES BY-LAW
Being a By-Law to regulate the supply of Vital Services
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-laws listed
on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience only and is not the
official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate reference to the By-law, certified copies should be
obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 1
CITY OF HAMILTON
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW 09-190
VITAL SERVICES BY-LAW
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-law No. Effective Date
21-146 August 13, 2021 Adding definition of APS By-law
Repealing and replacing subsection 3(4)
Amending subsection 4(1)
Adding sections 14.1 and 14.2
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 2
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW 09-190
VITAL SERVICES BY-LAW
Being a By-law to Repeal By-law 05-322 and Requiring the Supply of Vital
Services
WHEREAS City Council deems it necessary to require the supply of gas, fuel oil, or
electricity by landlords and the suppliers of such vital services and to prohibit the
cancellation of such vital services to rental units;
AND WHEREAS City Council deems it necessary to repeal and replace By-law No. 05-
322 respecting vital services;
AND WHEREAS Part XIII, Sections 215 through 223 of the Residential Tenancies Act,
2006, S.O. 2006 Chapter 17, provides for the enactment and enforcement of a vital
services by-law, lien and rent collection rights, and related matters;
AND WHEREAS Section 23.5 of the Municipal Act, 2001 S.O. 2001, Chapter 25 allows
City Council to delegate hearings or the opportunity for a hearing to its committees;
AND WHEREAS Section 446 of the Municipal Act, 2001 provides that a by-law passed
under any Act directing or requiring a person to do a matter or thing, allows the
municipality to provide that in default of the thing or matter being done by the person
directed or required to do it, the matter or thing may be done by the City, at the persons
expense, and allowing the municipality may for that purpose enter upon lands at any
reasonable time;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
1(1) In this By-law,
(a) “adequate and suitable” in respect of a vital service, means that the vital
service is supplied and available to the rental unit, and for greater certainty
includes the provision of such service to an appliance which is serving the
rental unit with heat or water;
(b) “City” means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic
area of the City of Hamilton, as the context requires;
(c) “Director” means the Director of Municipal Law Enforcement of the City or
the Director’s designate;
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 3
(d) “Officer” means, in relation to a person carrying out duties of
administration or enforcement under this By-law on behalf of the Director,
a person appointed under this or any City by-law as a municipal law
enforcement officer or inspector, or any other person assigned
administrative duties by the Director for purposes under this By-law;
(e) “Residential Tenancies Act, 2006” means the Residential Tenancies Act,
2006, S. O. 2006, Chapter 17; and,
(f) “APS By-law” shall mean the City’s Administrative Penalties By-law No.
17-225.(as amended: By-law 21-146)
1(2) For the purposes of interpretation of this By-law, the applicable provisions of
sections 2 and 3 of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 shall apply, including but
not limited to the definitions for landlord, rental unit and vital service, except as
specifically limited by this By-law.
SHORT TITLE
2 This By-law is named and may be cited as the “Vital Services By-law”.
APPLICATION OF BY-LAW
3(1) This By-law shall not apply to a landlord with respect to a rental unit to the extent
that the tenant has expressly agreed to obtain and maintain a vital service.
3(2) This By-law only applies to residential rental buildings which are tenant occupied
or where a tenant has a right to occupy a rental unit.
3(3) This By-law applies to residential rental buildings as described in subsection 3(2)
whether or not notice of the shut-off of a vital service is required under section 6.
3(4) This By-law only applies to vital services which are gas, fuel oil, electricity or
water. (as amended: By-law 21-146)
LANDLORDS
Adequate and Suitable Vital Services
4(1) Every landlord shall provide adequate and suitable vital services to each of the
landlord’s rental units, and no landlord shall cease to provide a vital service for a
rental unit, excepting only when necessary to alter or repair the rental unit and
only for the minimum period of time necessary to affect the alteration or the
repair.
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 4
(a) The landlord or property managers of a building shall notify the tenants of that
building if a vital service will be shut off for any period of time, in accordance
with the requirements under this By-law. (as amended: By-law 21-146)
(b) The notice from the landlord or property manager to the affected tenant(s)
shall be in writing and shall be given to the tenant(s) at least twenty-four (24)
hours in advance of the vital service being shut off, or as soon as practicable
under the circumstances. Notices may be sent by e-mail, mail, or a notice
posted in a conspicuous place in the building where it is most likely to come
to the attention of the tenants. (as amended: By-law 21-146)
(c) The notice shall indicate the reason for the vital service being shut off and the
expected time it will be turned back on. (as amended: By-law 21-146)
4(2) A landlord shall be deemed to have caused the cessation of a vital service for a
rental unit if the landlord is obligated by the rental agreement to pay for the vital
service and fails to do so and as a result of the non-payment the vital service is
no longer provided to the rental unit.
4(3) For the purposes of this By-law, an adequate and suitable supply is not provided
where the electrical supply is restricted by a load limiter added by a supplier as a
result of non-payment by the landlord for the electrical supply.
4(4) A landlord, for the purpose of restoring the supply of a vital service under this by-
law, shall:
(a) provide the City, its agents or contractors, suppliers or public authorities
concerned with the safe restoration of a vital service with such information,
building plans and assistance as may be required to safely restore the supply
of a vital service to rental units, including arranging for and communicating
reasonable times to enter the common or other areas and rental units at the
property, and providing information on whether rental units or other dwelling
areas are occupied or not;
(b) serve notices upon tenants, occupants, superintendent staff or other agents of
the landlord to ensure access by the landlord, and arrange for access to the
building and its rental units by the landlord to ensure the supply of a vital
service can be safely restored, and communicate with the City, a supplier or
public authority when the building and its rental units have been checked to
allow safe restoration of service;
(c) carry out alterations or repairs, including restoring or replacing any
connection, equipment or part of the system involved in the supply of a vital
service to a rental unit as may be required to safely restore the supply of a
vital service, and to do such things in the minimum period necessary to effect
the repair or alteration;
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 5
(d) allow a supplier or public authority to inspect, replace or repair their own
equipment installed at the building or any connection to or part of their system
of supply needed for safe restoration of vital services;
(e) provide access to common or other areas of the building needed for the City,
its agents and contractors, suppliers, or public authorities for inspection of
connections, equipment and systems involved in the supply of a vital service,
as may be necessary for the safe restoration of a vital service supply; and,
(f) not attempt to or actually interfere with, hinder or obstruct the City, its agents
or contractors, and suppliers or public authorities involved in the restoration of
vital service or related matters under this By-law, where the landlord has
failed to carry out the required safe restoration of services themselves.
Director’s Notice or Warning
5(1) The Director may give notice or warning to a landlord responsible for the
cessation of supply of a vital service or to other persons with an interest in the
property who may be affected by the City’s authority under this By-law including
tenants, of the City’s intention to take action under this By-law in the event a vital
service is discontinued, but the failure of such notice to be given or of it coming to
the attention of the landlord or others does not prevent or limit the taking of any
action herein.
5(2) Notices or warnings under subsection 5(1) may be personally delivered, posted
on the property in a prominent place, or mailed to the last known address of
persons which address may include the address supplied by tenants used to
supply rent payments or to contact the landlord for the purposes of the lease or
rental of the units.
SUPPLIERS
Notice to City
6(1) Subject to subsection 6(2), no supplier of a vital service shall cease to provide
the vital service to a building to which this By-law applies until written notice of
the intended discontinuance has been delivered to the City in compliance with
this section at least thirty (30) days before the supplier ceases to provide the vital
service.
6(2) A vital service supplier is required to give notice to the City only if the vital service
is to be discontinued for a rental unit or any part or whole of the building
containing such rental unit because the landlord or such other person acting on
behalf of the landlord has breached a contract with the supplier for the supply of
the vital service, and further such notice is only required:
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 6
(a) in the case of a supplier of natural gas, where there are five or more
residential rental units in the building affected by the shut-off;
(b) in the case of a supplier of electricity or fuel oil, where there are three or
more residential rental units in the building affected by the shut-off; or,
(c) where there are any number of residential rental units in the building
affected by the shut-off and the supplier is aware that the vital service is
supplied under a contract with the landlord.
6(3) A supplier shall deliver the notice of shut-off required in this section, marked
“URGENT, Notice of Shut-off of Vital Service” to the attention of the Director,
Municipal Law Enforcement Section of the City of Hamilton by e-mail to
MLE@hamilton.ca, or by facsimile to telephone number (905) 643-1198. In the
event the supplier receives written notice from the Director of Municipal Law
Enforcement changing the contact information or methods of delivery of notices
in this section, then the supplier shall use such new methods until the By-law is
further amended.
6(4) A supplier shall include the following details in the notice required by this section:
(a) the municipal address of the property, a list of the units affected by the
discontinuance where known, and the type of vital service being
discontinued;
(b) the name, address and telephone number of the person responsible for
payment for the vital service;
(c) a statement that the reason for the discontinuance of the vital service is for
non-payment, or alternatively indicating without particulars that the vital
service is being discontinued for some other breach of the supply contract;
(d) the date and approximate time proposed for discontinuance of the vital
service;
(e) a reference to this By-law by name; and,
(f) the name, telephone number, and fax number of the person at the supplier
who is responsible for the disconnection and of the person who may be
contacted to receive directions to arrange reconnection.
6(5) A supplier shall deliver additional written notice to the Director of Municipal Law
Enforcement where the details mentioned in subsection 6(4) have changed, and
in particular shall deliver immediate notice in the event the disconnection of a
vital service is cancelled or rescheduled whether by reason of payment of the
account or otherwise.
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 7
Director’s Direction or Request
7(1) Upon the direction of the Director, a supplier shall promptly restore or supply a
vital service to a building or rental unit.
7(2) Upon the request of the Director, a supplier shall provide such written details,
invoices or updates as the Director deems necessary to implement the provisions
of this By-law, including amounts owing for a vital service supplied to a building
or rental unit, and details as set out in subsections 6(4) and 6(5) if not previously
included in notices delivered to the Director of Municipal Law Enforcement.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
General
8(1) Administration and enforcement of this By-law shall be performed by the Director,
and by such Officers as are appointed or assigned, except where duties are
specified for the City Clerk, and the Director or Clerk may assign such duties or
retain such agents or assistance as required, in particular including for the
purpose of registering liens and collecting of rents under this By-law.
8(2) No person shall hinder, obstruct, or interfere with, or attempt to hinder, obstruct
or interfere with the Director, any Officer or other person mentioned in subsection
8(1) while acting on the City’s behalf in exercising a power or performing a duty
under this By-law or relevant to this By-law.
8(3) The Director is authorized to issue or cause to be issued notices and warnings
under this By-law and to give directions to restore supplies of vital services.
8(4) The Director, any Officer or other person acting under this By-law, may exercise
the powers of entry and inspection at all reasonable times in the manner provided
for in section 218 of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006, subject to the
limitations and requirements in section 218 that entry to a rental unit shall only be
made where the consent of the occupier is obtained after informing the occupant
of their right to refuse permission, or under the authority of a warrant.
8(5) The Director, any Officer or a person acting under the directions of either may
collect information or copies of documents from landlords, tenants and suppliers
for determining the application and enforcement of this By-law, including
information on costs and copies of any lease and rent payments made there
under, and for that purpose may enter the premises at all reasonable times in the
manner provided for in section 218 of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006 and
subject to the limitations and requirements of such entry in respect of rental units.
8(6) The Director, any Officer or person acting under the direction of either may,
where the landlord has failed to do a matter or thing required of the landlord
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 8
under this By-law, do or carry out such matter or thing, including making
necessary access the property or parts at reasonable times.
8(7) No entry shall be made to a rental unit or other place actually occupied as a
dwelling unit under subsection 8(6) above unless the consent of the occupier is
obtained after informing the occupier of their right to refuse permission, or unless
under authority of a warrant.
8(8) Where the City incurs costs under subsection 8(6) above as the result of the
landlord’s failure to do a matter or thing required under this By-law, other than
costs for the supply of vital services, reconnection fees charged by a supplier or
the City’s own administrative costs, the additionally incurred costs may be
collected by action or in a manner like taxes under section 446 of the Municipal
Act, 2001, S. O. 2001 c. 25, together with 15% interest per year, calculated from
the time the City incurs the cost until the amount is paid.
8(9) For greater certainty, costs intended to be recoverable under subsection 8(8)
above include those costs invoiced to and incurred by the City as a result of
attempted or actual obstruction, interference or hindrance of the City, its
contractors or agents, and suppliers or other public authorities involved in the
safe restoration of a vital service, and any locksmith costs in obtaining access to
an area of the property under control of the landlord or the landlord’s contractor
or agent for which the landlord has not given reasonable access considering the
vital aspect of the service and obligations of the landlord to tenants.
Agreements
9(1) The Director is authorized to negotiate and enter into agreements with suppliers
to provide for the supply of vital services to buildings and rental units or for the
payment of such services, all on behalf of the City.
9(2) The Director shall maintain copies of any agreements entered into on behalf of
the City of Hamilton with service suppliers in respect of subsection 9(1), and shall
account for the amounts spent under such agreements and the amounts
collected by the City through voluntary payment, rent collection, lien or otherwise
under this By-law.
Liens
10(1) The Director is authorized to register or cause to be registered a lien in favour of
the City against a property where a landlord does not provide a vital service in
accordance with this By-law for an amount spent by the City to restore or provide
the vital service plus an administrative fee of 10%.
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 9
10(2) On behalf of the City Clerk, the Director may issue and mail interim certificates
and certificates with respect to a lien under subsection 10(1) as provided for
under the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006.
10(3) Subject to subsections 10(4) and 10(7), the registered owner of the affected
property and persons having registered mortgages or other encumbrances on the
title to the property who are sent an interim certificate may appeal the interim
certificate to the City by completing and signing an appeal request on the form
available at the City Clerks Office, and delivering the written appeal to the
Committee Clerk for the Economic Development and Planning Committee in the
City Clerk’s Office, within fifteen (15) days of the date of mailing of the interim
certificate.
10(4) The appellant in their appeal request shall:
(a) indicate the grounds for appeal of the amount of the interim certificate in
accordance with the section 220 of the Residential Tenancies Act, 2006;
(b) provide copies of any documents to be relied upon at the hearing, or
alternatively, provide such documents no less than ten (10) days prior to the
scheduled hearing; and,
(c) include an address for service where notices or documents can be served
upon the appellant.
10(5) City Council delegates the hearing of the appeal to the Economic Development
and Planning Committee, which Committee shall afford an appellant who files an
appeal request in accordance with the requirements and time limits in this By-
law, an opportunity for a hearing of the appeal and shall allow for City staff
involved to respond to the appeal.
10(6) At the conclusion of a hearing of an appeal by the Economic Development and
Planning Committee, the Committee shall supply a written report to City Council
summarizing the evidence and arguments presented by the parties, being the
appellants and City, the findings of fact made by the Committee and its
recommendations if any with reasons on the merits of the appeal, and City
Council may upon receipt of the report make a decision in the appeal without
holding a further hearing or opportunity for hearing.
10(7) The Committee Clerk for the Economic Development and Planning Committee
will:
(a) where an appeal is received in compliance with this section within the period
for an appeal, set the hearing date of the appeal and arrange a hearing
before the Committee;
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 10
(b) mail notice of the date, time and place of the appeal hearing to the appellant
at the address provided in the appeal request and to the Director, a
minimum of three (3) weeks prior to the date of the appeal; and,
(c) after the hearing of an appeal, will send a copy of the Committee’s report to
the parties and to City Council.
10(8) Where more than one person appeals the same interim certificate, the appeals
shall be heard together unless the Economic Development and Planning
Committee directs otherwise.
10(9) The decision of City Council in an appeal is final.
10(10) The City Clerk may sign a final certificate in the event an interim certificate is not
appealed in accordance with this by-law, or may issue such final certificate as
required by the decision of City Council in the event of an appeal.
Rents
11(1) Where the City is supplying a vital service under this By-law, the Director may
cause to be issued orders or notices to the tenant or tenants of the rental units in
the building or property for the payment of any or all rents to the City, and issue
cancellation of such directions to pay rent where the City has been fully re-paid
as to such amounts and fees due under this By-law, and may give notices for the
purpose of advising tenants at a property of the ending of the City’s supply of vital
service.
11(2) The Director shall cause an accounting of rent payments or other collections
under this By-law to be provided to the landlord or other person entitled to collect
rents at a property, and shall cause a refund the balance of any payment or
collection beyond the amount spent by the City and its administrative fees, and
arrange for the discharge of any lien where the City has been fully re-paid as to
amounts expended and its fees.
OFFENCES AND PENALTIES
12 Every person who contravenes a provision of this By-law is guilty of an offence
for each day or part of a day on which the offence occurs or continues, and upon
conviction is liable to the penalties provided for in section 61 of the Provincial
Offences Act, R. S. O. 1990, c. P.33.
13 Every director or officer of a corporation convicted of an offence under this By-
law who knowingly concurs in the commission of the offence by the corporation is
also guilty of an offence, and upon conviction is liable to the penalties provided
for in section 61 of the Provincial Offences Act, R. S. O. 1990, c. P.33.
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 11
14 Sections 431 and 440 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S. O. 2001, c. 25, apply to this
By-law, providing respectively, for a court of competent jurisdiction to prohibit the
contravention or repetition of an offence, and, upon application of the
municipality, for a court to make orders to restrain a contravention, which
remedies may be sought in addition to any remedy or penalty imposed under this
By-law.
14.1 Without limiting the above, every person who contravenes this by-law may
also be liable, upon issuance of a penalty notice, to pay an administrative
penalty in an amount specified in the APS By-law. (as amended: By-law 21-146)
14.2 An administrative penalty imposed by the City on a person under section
434.1 of the Municipal Act, 2001, constitutes a debt of the person to the
municipality. If an administrative penalty is not paid within 15 days after the
day that it becomes due and payable, the City may add the administrative
penalty to the tax roll for any property in the City of Hamilton for which all of
the owners are responsible for paying the administrative penalty and collect
it in the same manner as municipal taxes. (as amended: By-law 21-146)
TRANSITION AND ENACTMENT
15(1) Any contract entered into for the supply of vital services at the time of enactment
of this By-law, and any step taken, notice, lien or certificate issued by the City, or
any appeal commenced, all under By-law No. 05-322, shall be deemed to be
validly done under this By-law, and this By-law shall apply so far as practicable
to such contract, step taken, notice, lien, certificate or appeal.
15(2) Amounts spent by the City under By-law No. 05-322 to restore or provide a vital
service including an administrative fee of 10% are continued as debts that may
be enforced and recovered under this By-law.
15(3) Any reference to By-law No. 05-322 shall be deemed to be a reference to this
By-law.
15(4) If a court declares any provision of this By-law invalid, it is the intention of
Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to be in force and effect.
15(5) By-law No. 05-322 is repealed.
15(6) This By-law comes into force on the date it is passed.
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 12
PASSED this 13th day of August 2021.
Fred Eisenberger Kevin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk
Vital Signs By-law (amended October 2021) Page 13



Content from 09210 to amend zoning bylaws of the former area municipalitiespdf:
Authority: Item 9, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 09-018 (PED09256)
CM: September 30,2009
Bill No. 210
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-21 0
To Amend Zoning By-law 87-57 (Ancaster), Zoning By-law 3581-86
(Dundas), Zoning By-law 90-145-2 (Flamborough), Zoning By-law 464
(Glanbrook), Zoning By-law 6593 (Hamilton), and Zoning By-law 3692-92
(Stoney Creek), City of Hamilton Comprehensive Zoning By-law 05-200
Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
WHEREAS the Citv of Hamilton Act, 1999, Statues of Ontario, 1999 Chap. 14,
Sch. C. did incorporate, as of January lSt, 2001, the municipality "City of
Hamilton";
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the successor to certain area
municipalities, including the former area municipality known as "The Corporation
of the Town of Ancaster", "The Corporation of the Town of Dundas", "The
Corporation of the Town of Flamborough", "The Corporation of the Township of
Glanbrook, "The Corporation of the City of Hamilton", and "The Corporation of
the City of Stoney Creek, and is the successor to the former Regional
Municipality, namely, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth;
AND WHEREAS the Citv of Hamilton Act, 1999, provides that the Zoning By-
laws of the former area municipalities continue in force in the City of Hamilton
until subsequently amended or repealed by the Council of the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) was enacted on the 22nd
day of June, 1987, and approved by the Ontario Municipal Board on the 23rdd ay
of January, 1989;
AND WHEREAS Zoning By-law 3581-86 (Dundas) was enacted on the 22" day
of May, 1986, and approved by the Ontario Municipal Board on the 10' day of
May, 1988;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the Corporation of the Town of Flamborough
passed Zoning By-law No. 90-145-2 (Flamborough) on the Eith day of November,
1990, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated
the 21 day of December, 1992;
st
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 2 of 12
AND WHEREAS Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook) was enacted on the 16"
day of March, 1992, and approved by the Ontario Municipal Board on the 3lSt
day of May 1993;
AND WHEREAS Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) was enacted on the 25"
day of July, 1950;
AND WHEREAS Zoning By-law No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) was enacted on the
8thd ay of December, 1992, and approved by the Ontario Municipal Board on the
31 day of May, 19 94;
st
AND WHEREAS the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being 05-200, came into
force on May 25,2005;
AND WHEREAS this By-law creates a consistent approach to the regulation of
Outdoor Commercial Patios within the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is in conformity with the Official Plan of the City of
Hamilton (the Official Plan of the former Town of Ancaster, the Official Plan of the
former Town of Dundas, the Official Plan of the former Town of Flamborough, the
Official Plan of the former Township of Glanbrook, the Official Plan of the former
City of Hamilton, and the Official Plan of the former City of Stoney Creek).
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Town of Ancaster
1. That SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS of Zoning By-law No.87-57 (former Town
of Ancaster), hereby amended by adding the following definition:
"3.152 "Outdoor Commercial Patio"
Shall mean any outdoor area used in conjunction with any
establishment licensed under the Liquor Licence Act, where
meals or refreshments are served to the public for consumption
on the premises."
2 That SECTION 7: GENERAL PROVISIONS of Zoning By-law No. 87-57
(former Town of Ancaster), is hereby amended by adding the following
regulation:
"7.29 Outdoor Commercial Patios
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor Commercial
Patio shall comply with the following:
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 3 of 12
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Commercial Patios shall be designed and used to
accommodate seating of customers
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Commercial Patio shall be limited to a seated
capacity of a minimum of 1. I0 square metres of patio area
per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all outdoor
areas and portions of the patio that cross property lines such
as road allowances.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no Outdoor
Commercial Patio shall be permitted on a lot where any lot
line abuts a Residential Zone or where such lot is separated
from a Residential Zone by a laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone or the
lot is separated from the Residential Zone by a laneway, an
Outdoor Commercial Patio shall only be permitted in the
front yard.
d) Prohibition of Commercial Entertainment and Recreation:
That portion of a lot on which the Outdoor Commercial Patio is
permitted shall not be used for commercial entertainment or
commercial recreation including live or recorded music or dance
facilities."
Town of Dundas
3. That SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS of Zoning By-law 3581-86 (former Town
of Dundas), is hereby amended by adding the following definition:
"3.2.103 OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL PATIO
Means any outdoor area used in conjunction with any
establishment licensed under the Liquor Licence Act, where
meals or refreshments are served to the public for
consumption on the premises."
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 4 of 12
4. That SECTION 6: GENERAL REGULATIONS of Zoning By-law No. 3581-
86 (former Town of Dundas), is hereby amended by adding the following
regulation:
"6.25 OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL PATIOS
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor Commercial
Patio shall comply with the following:
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Commercial Patios shall be designed and used to
accommodate seating of customers
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Commercial Patio shall be limited to a seated
capacity of a minimum of 1. I0 square metres of patio area
per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all outdoor
areas and portions of the patio that cross property lines such
as road allowances.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no Outdoor
Commercial Patio shall be permitted on a lot where any lot
line abuts a Residential Zone or where such lot is separated
from a Residential Zone by a laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone or the
lot is separated from the Residential Zone by a laneway, an
Outdoor Commercial Patio shall only be permitted in the
front yard.
d) Prohibition of Commercial Entertainment and Recreation:
That portion of a lot on which the Outdoor Commercial Patio is
permitted shall not be used for commercial entertainment or
commercial recreation including live or recorded music or dance
facilities."
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 5 of 12
Town of Flamborounh
5. That SECTION 3 - DEFINITIONS, of Zoning By-law 90-145-2 (former
Town of Flamborough), is hereby amended by adding the following
definition:
"Outdoor Commercial Patio shall mean any outdoor area used in
conjunction with any establishment licensed under the Liauor Licence Act,
where meals or refreshments are sewed to the public for consumption on
the premises."
6. That SECTION 5 - GENERAL PROVISIONS, of Zoning By-law 90-145-2
(former Town of Flamborough), is hereby amended by adding the
following regulation:
"5.37 OUTDOOR COMMERCIAL PATIOS
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor
Commercial Patio shall comply with the following:
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Commercial Patios shall be designed and used to
accommodate seating of customers
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Commercial Patio shall be limited to a
seated capacity of a minimum of 1. I0 square metres
of patio area per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all
outdoor areas and portions of the patio that cross
property lines such as road allowances.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no
Outdoor Commercial Patio shall be permitted on a lot
where any lot line abuts a Residential Zone or where
such lot is separated from a Residential Zone by a
laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone
or the lot is separated from the Residential Zone by a
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
laneway, an outdoor commercial patio shall only be
permitted in the front yard.
d) Prohibition of Commercial Entertainment and Recreation:
That portion of a lot on which the Outdoor Commercial Patio
is permitted shall not be used for commercial entertainment
or commercial recreation including live or recorded music or
dance facilities."
Township of Glanbrook
7. That SECTION 4: DEFINITIONS of Zoning By-law 464 (former Township
of Glanbrook), is amended by adding the following definition:
"OUTDOOR PATIO RESTAURANTS"
Shall mean any outdoor area used in conjunction with any establishment
licensed under the Liquor Licence Act, where meals or refreshments are
served to the public for consumption on the premises."
8. That SECTION 25: GENERAL COMMERCIAL "C3" ZONE of Zoning By-
law 464 (former Township of Glanbrook), is hereby amended as follows:
a) SECTION 25.2 - PERMITTED USES, is hereby amended by
deleting the following subsection:
"(0) Accessory Outdoor Patio Restaurants
An outdoor patio is a permitted accessory use to any
restaurant subject to the following provisions:
(i) No part of the outdoor patio restaurant shall be used
as a place of entertainment for the purpose of
providing entertainment or amusement including live
or recorded music, dance facilities, theatrical
petformances, video games, film presentations, video
screens, television nor any other similar activities;
(ii) No outdoor patio restaurant shall be located in any
yard abutting land zoned Residential in this By-law or
where the abutting land is used for residential
purposes;
(iii) No outdoor patio restaurant shall be located in any
yard abutting a street if a Residential Zone is located
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 7 of 12
on the opposite side of said street, unless the patio
restaurant is setback a minimum distance of 30
metres (100 feet) from the residential property line;
and
(iv) The seating capacity of the outdoor patio restaurant
shall not exceed fifty percent (50%) of the seating
capacity of the restaurant with which the patio is
associated, and in any event the maximum number of
people that may be accommodated in the outdoor
patio shall be 50 persons."
9. That SECTION 7: GENERAL PROVISIONS FOR ALL ZONES of Zoning
By-law 464 (former Township of Glanbrook), is hereby amended by
adding the following regulation:
"7.42 Outdoor Patio Restaurants
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor Patio
Restaurant shall comply with the following:
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Patio Restaurants shall be designed and used to
accommodate seating of customers
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Patio Restaurant shall be limited to a
seated capacity of a minimum of 1. I0 square metres
of patio area per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all
outdoor areas and portions of the patio that cross
property lines such as road allowances.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no
Outdoor Patio Restaurant shall be permitted on a lot
where any lot line abuts a Residential Zone or where
such lot is separated from a Residential Zone by a
laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone
or the lot is separated from the Residential Zone by a
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 8 of 12
laneway, an outdoor commercial patio shall only be
permitted in the front yard.
d) Prohibition of Commercial Entertainment and Recreation:
That portion of a lot on which the Outdoor Patio Restaurant
is permitted shall not be used for commercial entertainment
or commercial recreation including live or recorded music or
dance facilities."
City of Hamilton
9. That Section 18. (11) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR
PATIOS, of Zoning By-law No. 6593 (former City of Hamilton), is hereby
amended by deleting the following regulation:
"18 (1 1) Notwithstanding any of the provisions of the By-law every
outdoor patio shall comply with the following,
(a) Seating Capacity Requirements:
1. No outdoor patio shall provide for,
A. more than 50% of the seating accommodation
permitted under the Liquor Licence Act to the
restaurant or tavern with which the outdoor patio
is associated, or
B. seating accommodation for more than 50
persons,
Whichever is the greater;
(b) Location Requirements:
1. Except as provided in paragraph 2, no outdoor patio
shall be located where any lot line adjoins a
residential district or is separated from a residential
district by a lane or alley.
2. Where only the rear lot line adjoins a residential
district or is separated from the residential district by a
lane or alley, an outdoor patio shall not be prohibited
in the front yard.
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
3. Where a lot adjoins a residential district or is
separated from the residential district by a lane or
alley, no outdoor patio shall be located above the
elevation of the floor of the first storey of the principal
building."
And replacing it with the following:
"18. (11 ) SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR OUTDOOR PATIOS
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor Patio shall
comply with the following:
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Patios shall be designed and used to accommodate
seating of customers
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Patio shall be limited to a seated capacity of a
minimum of 1. I0 square metres of patio area per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all outdoor
areas and portions of the patio that cross property lines such
as road allowances.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no Outdoor
Patio shall be permitted on a lot where any lot line abuts a
Residential Zone or where such lot is separated from a
Residential Zone by a laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone or the
lot is separated from the Residential Zone by a laneway, an
Outdoor Patio shall only be permitted in the front yard.
d) Prohibition of Commercial Entertainment and Recreation:
That portion of a lot on which the Outdoor Patio is permitted shall
not be used for commercial entertainment or commercial recreation
including live or recorded music or dance facilities."
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 10 of 12
City of Stonev Creek
10. That PART 2 - DEFINITIONS, of Zoning By-law 3692-92 (former City of
Stoney Creek), is hereby amended by deleting the following definition:
-
"Restaurant Outdoor Patio
Means an outdoor area used on a seasonal basis accessory to a
restaurant where the outdoor patio is permitted in the respective zone,
which outdoor patio restaurant provides seating accommodation as well
as meals or refreshments for the public for consumption on the premises
and located entirely on the same lot as the restaurant. An outdoor patio
restaurant may be covered by a roof or roof structure."
and replacing it with the following:
-
"Restaurant Outdoor Patio
Shall mean any outdoor area used in conjunction with any establishment
licensed under the Liquor Licence Act, where meals or refreshments are
served to the public for consumption on the premises."
11. That PART 8 - COMMERCIAL ZONES, of Zoning By-law 3692-92 (former
City of Stoney Creek), is hereby amended by deleting the following
regulation:
"8.1.7 Outdoor Patio Restaurants
For any outdoor patio restaurant within any commercial zone, the
following provisions shall apply to said outdoor patio restaurant:
(a) No part of the outdoor patio restaurant shall be used as a place of
entertainment for the purpose of providing entertainment or
amusement including live or recorded music, dance facilities,
theatrical performances, video games, film presentations, video
screens or televisions.
(b) No outdoor patio restaurant shall be located in any yard abutting a
residential zone.
(c) No outdoor patio restaurant shall be located in any yard abutting a
street if a residential zone is located on the opposite side of said
street, unless the patio restaurant is set back a minimum distance
of 30 metres from the residential property line.
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 11 of 12
(d) The seating capacity of the outdoor patio restaurant shall not
exceed 50 percent of the seating capacity of the restaurant with
which the patio is associated in any event the maximum number of
people that may be accommodated in the outdoor patio shall be 50.
and replacing it with the following:
"8.1.7 Outdoor Patio Restaurants
Notwithstanding any provisions of this By-law, every Outdoor Patio
Restaurant shall comply with the following:
a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Patio Restaurants shall be designed and used to
accommodate seating of customers
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Patio Restaurant shall be limited to a seated
capacity of a minimum of 1. I0 square metres of patio area
per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all outdoor
areas and portions of the patio that cross property lines such
as road allowances.
c) Location Requirements:
i) Except as provided in Subsection b) (ii) below, no Outdoor
Patio Restaurant shall be permitted on a lot where any lot
line abuts a Residential Zone or where such lot is separated
from a Residential Zone by a laneway; and,
ii) Where only the rear lot line abuts a Residential Zone or the
lot is separated from the Residential Zone by a laneway, an
Outdoor Patio Restaurant shall only be permitted in the front
yard.
d) Prohibition of Commercial Entertainment and Recreation:
That portion of a lot on which the Outdoor Patio Restaurant is
permitted shall not be used for commercial entertainment or
commercial recreation including live or recorded music or dance
facilities."
By-law Respecting Outdoor Commercial Patios
Page 12 of 12
City of Hamilton Comprehensive Zoning By-law
12. That Section 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS of By-law 05-200 is amended by
deleting the following regulation:
"4.20 a) Seating Capacity Requirements:
No outdoor patio shall provide for:
i) More than 50% of the seating accommodation
permitted under the Liquor Licence Act to the
restaurant with which the outdoor commercial patio is
associated; or,
ii) Seating accommodation for more than 50 persons.
whichever is the greater."
13. That Section 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS of By-law 05-200 is amended
by adding the following regulations:
"4.20 a) Design Requirements
Outdoor Commercial Patios shall be designed and used to
accommodate seating of customers.
b) Seating Capacity Requirements
i) An Outdoor Commercial Patio shall be limited to a
seated capacity of a minimum of 1. I0 square metres
of patio area per person.
ii) Maximum seated capacity shall be inclusive of all
outdoor areas and portions of the patio that cross
property lines such as road allowances."
7. That the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving
of notice of passing of this By-law in accordance with the Plannina Act.
NACTED this 3othd ay of September
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09227 whistleblower bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 6, Audit and
Administration Committee
Report 09-015 (HUR09012)
CM: November 11, 2009
Bil No. 227
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-227
WHISTLEBLOWER BY-LAW
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton desires to put into place a mechanism
whereby, under appropriate circumstances, employees who disclose serious wrongdoing
regarding City operations are protected from reprisal and whereby, under appropriate
circumstances, investigations or alternative actions are undertaken in response to such
disclosures;
AND WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, 8.0. 2001, c. 25,
as amended, authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or desirable for
municipal purposes and, in particular, paragraphs 2, 3, 4, 5 and 8 of subsection 10(2)
authorize by-laws respecting the accountability and transparency of the City and its
operations, the financial management of the City, the public assets of the City, the
economic, the social and environmental well-being of the City, and the protection of
persons and property;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
PURPOSE AND SCOPE
1. This By-law recognizes that it is in the public interest to maintain and enhance
public confidence in the City and its employees, by providing for:
(a) the disclosure of serious wrongdoing with respect to the City's operations by
its employees;
(b) the protection from reprisals of employees for making disclosures of serious
wrongdoing when such disclosures are qualifying disclosures, including
prescribing the conduct of employees with supervisory or management
responsibilities and members of Council with respect to the provision of
protection from reprisals; and
Whistleblower By-law
Page 2 of 8
(c) the appropriate investigation or alternative action in response to disclosures
of serious wrongdoing is undertaken including prescribing the conduct of
employees and members of Council with respect to the investigation of such
disclosures.
2. The Director of Audit Services is responsible for determining if disclosures of
serious wrongdoing are qualifying disclosures and for ensuring that the appropriate
investigation or alternative action in response to disclosures of serious wrongdoing
is undertaken in accordance with this By-law.
3. All employees with supervisory or management responsibilities and who know of
reprisals are responsible for ensuring that employees are protected from reprisals in
accordance with this By-law.
4. This By-law is deemed to be a procedure, rule or policy governing the ethical
behaviour of members of Council for the purposes of the Integrity Commissioner
By-law.
DEFINITIONS
5. In this By-law:
"City" means the municipality of the City of Hamilton;
"City Manager" means the City's City Manager;
"Council" means the Council of the City;
"Director of Audit Services" means the City's Director of Audit Services or his/her
designate;
"employee" means an employee of the City and excludes the Mayor and Members
of Council;
"good faith" means an act which is not done trivially, frivolously or for a vexatious
purpose, and this definition shall be considered in determining what is bad faith
under this By-law;
"reprisal" means any of the following measures taken against an employee because
the employee has made a qualifying disclosure:
(a) the dismissal, suspension, demotion, discipline, harassment of an
employee;
Whistleblower By-law
Page 3 of 8
(b) the denial of a benefit of employment to an employee;
(c) any other disadvantaging of an employee;
(d) or the threat to take any of the measure in paragraphs (a) to (c)
inclusive;
"serious wrongdoing" means:
(a) a contravention of the Criminal Code, federal or provincial statute or
regulation, or City by-law;
(b) an act or omission that results or is likely to result in the misappropriation
or misuse of City funds or assets;
the City's Code of Conductfor Employees that results
(c) a contravention of
or is likely to result in profit, payment or compensation to the
employee( s);
(d) an act or omission that creates or is likely to create a substantial and
specific danger or harm to the life, health or safety of any person; or
(e) an act or omission that creates or is likely to create a substantial and
specific danger or harm to the environment; or
a reprisal; and
(f)
"supervisor/manager" means:
(a) the supervisor or manager to whom an employee normally reports; or
(b) in the case of a disclosure of serious wrongdoing involving the supervisor
or manager to whom an employee normally reports, the next-above
supervisor or manager in the employee's chain of command.
PROTECTION FROM REPRISAL
Requirements with respect to a Qualifying Disclosure
6. The Director of Audit Services shall in his/her sole discretion determine whether or
not a disclosure of serious wrongdoing made by an employee satisfies subsections
(a) to (d) inclusive and when he/she determines that the subsections have been
satisfied, the disclosure of serious wrongdoing is deemed a "qualifying disclosure"
for the purposes of this By-law:
Whistleblower By-law
Page 4 of 8
(a) the employee making the disclosure of serious wrongdoing identifies
himself/herself and his/her position with the City or his/her work title;
(b) the employee making the disclosure of serious wrongdoing has reasonable
grounds to believe there has been or is about to occur serious wrongdoing by
one or more employees or members of Council;
(c) the employee making the disclosure of serious wrongdoing does so in good
faith;
(d) the employee's disclosure of serious wrongdoing is made to one of the
following:
his/her supervisor/manager;
the head of his/her Department including the head's designate; or
the Director of Audit Services,
provided that, if the supervisor/manager or the head of Department including
the head's designate receives the disclosure of serious wrongdoing then
such supervisor/manager or head of Department including designate shall
submit the disclosure of serious wrongdoing immediately to the Director of
Audit Services.
7. The Director of Audit Services shall send a written notice of his/her receipt of a
disclosure of serious wrongdoing to the employee who made such disclosure.
Obligations with respect to a Reprisal
8. Every employee or member of Council with supervisory or management
responsibilities has a positive obligation to ensure that:
(a) an employee is not subjected to a reprisal; and
(b) employees under his/her direction are made aware of this By-law.
9. An employee who believes he/she has been subjected to a reprisal may make a
disclosure of serious wrongdoing section 6.
10. Nothing in this By-law impairs any right of an employee either at law or under any
term or condition of employment or any applicable collective agreement(s).
11. The provisions of this By-law for the protection of employees are in addition to
whistleblower or non-reprisal protection in any federal or provincial statute or
Whistleblower By-law
Page 5 of 8
regulation, and the provisions of this By-law shall not be construed as limiting such
protections.
INVESTIGATION OR ALTERNATIVE ACTION IN RESPONSE TO A DISCLOSURE
OF SERIOUS WRONGDOING
12.(1) At any time after a disclosure of serious wrongdoing is made, the Director of Audit
or not it is appropriate for
Services shall in his/her sole discretion determine whether
him/her to undertake an investigation or alternative action with respect to such
disclosure.
(2) In making his/her determination under subsection (1), the Director of Audit Services
shall consider, among other things:
(a) the length of time that has elapsed since date when the subject-matter of the
disclosure of serious wrongdoing is such that undertaking an investigation or
alternative action would serve no useful purpose;
whether or not undertaking an investigation or alternative action is
(b)
appropriate given the extent to which any investigation or alternative action
can be or has been undertaken by other duly authorized individuals or
entities, for example by:
the police under the Criminal Code;
the Integrity Commissioner By-law;
the Integrity Commissioner under
or
supervisory or management staff under City policies or procedures.
13. At any time when the Director of Audit Services is of the opinion that an
investigation or alternative action addressing a disclosure of serious wrongdoing can
be or has been undertaken by other duly authorized individuals or entities, he/she
shall immediately take such steps as are within his/her authority and practicable to:
refer the disclosure of serious wrongdoing to the individual or entity
(a)
responsible for such an investigation or alternative action;
conduct his/her investigation or alternative action, if any, so as not to
(b)
interfere with an investigation or alternative action undertaken by the other
individual or entity.
14.(1) When the Director of Audit Services determines under subsection 12(1) that it is
appropriate for him/her to undertake an investigation, the Director of Audit Services
Whistleblower By-law
Page 6 of 8
may conduct the investigation or may:
(a) appoint another employee; or
(b) in consultation with the City Manager, appoint an outside individual or entity,
to conduct all or part of the investigation.
(2) The Director of Audit Services shall take all reasonable steps to ensure that:
(a) an investigation under subsection (1) complies with City policies, procedures
and other requirements;
(b) the City's financial interests are protected including that the costs and
expenses of such an investigation are minimized without hampering the
ability of the Direction of Audit Services or an appointee under subsection
(1) from completing his/her investigation; and
(c) the City's internal resources, including but not limited to, the Audit Services,
Legal Services, Human Resources and Risk Management Services
Divisions, are used.
(3) The Director of Audit Services is entitled to investigate, or authorize an investigation
by an appointee under subsection (1) into:
(a) any further serious wrongdoing as disclosed by an investigation under this
By-law; or
(b) an act prohibited under subsection 15(3).
15.(1) Persons, including employees or members of Council, shall co-operate in any
investigations or alternative actions under this By-law, and no person shall obstruct
or interfere with the Director of Audit Services or an appointee under subsection
14(1) or a person acting on behalf of or under the direction of him/her in his/her
investigation or in the performance of any of his/her responsibilities under this By-
law.
(2) Notwithstanding section 6, an employee who has made a qualifying disclosure is not
entitled to protection from discipline, up to and including dismissal, if he/she does
not comply with subsection (1).
(3) No person advised of an investigation under this By-law and knowing that a City
document or thing is likely to be relevant to such an investigation shall:
(a) destroy, conceal, mutilate, falsify or otherwise alter the document or
thing; or
Whistleblower By-law
Page 7 of 8
(b) advise, instruct, propose or direct in any manner, any person to do
anything mentioned in paragraph (a).
16.(1) Upon the completion of an investigation under this By-law, the Director of Audit
Services shall make a report to the appropriate individual or entity as determined in
the sole discretion of the Director of Audit Services and such report shall include
what steps, if any, are to be undertaken in response to a report.
(2)A report made under subsection (1) which is made to a Committee of Councilor
Council, shall be submitted in accordance with the Municipal Act, 2001, the
Municipal Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act and the City's
Procedural By-law.
COMPLIANCE
17.(1) Any employee who fails to comply with this By-law may be disciplined, up to and
including dismissaL.
(2) The failure of a member of Council to comply with this By-law may result in a
complaint, inquiry and penalty under Integrity Commissioner By-law.
LIMITATIONS ON THE APPLICATION OF THIS BY-LAW
18.( 1) Nothing in this By-law is intended to limit the responsibilities of employees to
continue to carry out their job duties, including responsibilities to make reports to
their appropriate supervisors or managers, or to take appropriate action within the
scope of their job to prevent wrongdoing or the harm which may arise from such
wrongdoing.
(2) Nothing in this By-law is intended to limit the actions which may be taken by the City
or the consequences for an employee when an employee has acted contrary to their
job duties, in a negligent, dishonest, or vexatious manner, or contrary to this By-law.
(3) Nothing in the By-law is intended to permit employees to disregard their obligations
to comply with any other by-law, statute or regulation, including the Municipal
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act or any other statute or
regulation governing the access to or privacy of information;
(4) Nothing in this By-law restricts the City from utilizing the rights and powers available
to under the Municipal Act, 2001 or other laws, or from conducting, participating in,
or calling for such other investigations or inquiries as allowed by law and considered
advisable by the City.
ADMINISTRATION
Whistleblower By-law
Page 8 of 8
19. The Director of Audit Services is responsible for:
(a) administering this By-law, including but not limited to, implementing such
forms and procedures as required for the proper administration of this By-
law;
(b) reporting to Council quarterly, in the aggregate, on the number, nature and
outcome of disclosures of serious wrongdoing made under this By-law; and
declaring any conflict of interest he/she has arising from a disclosure of
(c)
serious wrongdoing or from any investigation or alternative action undertaken
under this By-law, to the City Manager so that his/her obligations may be re-
assigned by the City Manager.
20. The exercise of the Director of Audit Services' authority and discretion under this
By-law includes, but is not limited to, withholding, collecting, using, or disclosing
information which may reveal the identity of the employee making a disclosure of
serious wrongdoing as is necessary to protect the City's interests and to avoid or
limit harm to the City, the public or the employee.
CONFLICT AND COMING INTO FORCE
21.ln the event of a conflict between this By-law and any other by-law (except the
Integrity Commissioner By-law), procedure, rule or policy, this By-law prevails.
22. This By-law comes into force on May 11, 2010
PASSED and ENACTED this 11th day of November, 2009.
Kevin C. Christensen
City Clerk



Content from 09237 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 9, Economic Development
and Planning Committee,
Report; 09-023 (PED09283 and
Taxi Reform Sub Committee
Report 09-002)
CM: November 11,2009
Bil No. 237
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-237
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for an amendment to By-law 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Paragraph 64(1 )(0) of Schedule 25 is deleted and replaced by the following
new paragraph:
64( 1 )( 0 ) equip each licensed taxicab with:
(i) a Global Positioning System; and
(ii) an onboard camera on or before May 1, 2010;
2. This By-law comes into force on the date it is passed.
PASSED AND ENACTED this 11th day of November, 2009.
~n
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 09260 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: ltem 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-034 (FCSO9102/PW09100)
CM: December 9,2009
Bill No. 260
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09-260
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2010 Water Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law No. R84-026, being a
by-law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system
of The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of
water rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the gth day of December, 2009, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 3 of Committee of the Whole Report 09-034 and did
authorize the 2010 water and wastewater fees and charges, including but not
limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2010 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Clauses 12(5)(b) and (c) of By-law No. R84-026, as amended, are
repealed and the following substituted:
(b) notwithstanding clause (a) of this section, wherever a water service
is replaced or a water service agreement as referred to in section 4,
sub-section (10) has been entered into, the water service shall at
that time become a metered water service.
2. Schedule "A" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule " A attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
3. Schedule "C" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "C" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
4. Schedule "El' to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "En attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
5. Schedule "GI' to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "G" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
6. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2010.
7. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. R84-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED and ENACTED this gth day of December, 2009.
3
SCHEDULE "A"
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2010
Water: City of Hamilton
$394.30 per annum, plus applicable taxes.
Note: Sanitary Surcharge is 100% of non-metered water rate for a
combined total non-metered annual water and wastewater rate of
$788.60 per annum, plus applicable taxes.
SCHEDULE "C"
MISCELLANEOUS RATES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2010
(Referred to in sub-sections 12(6), (7) and (8))
1. Travelling Shows and Other Temporaw Occasions
The deposit required from travelling shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Thousand, Six Hundred and Forty-Seven and 901100
Dollars ($5,647.90), and consists of:
(a) Two Hundred and Sixty-Nine and Dollars ($269.00) as a usage
deposit (to be applied to the cost of temporary connection1
disconnection, the per diem rental cost for the hydrant adapter and
the amount due for water used); and
(b) Five Thousand, Three Hundred and Seventy-Eight and 901100
Dollars ($5,378.90) as a damage deposit (refundable upon return to
the City of the hydrant adapter, less any damages incurred).
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 10 of Schedule "E" to this By-
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
2. Public Water Filling Stations
(a) The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water
Filling Stations be $1.6214 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public
Water Filling Stations are located at:
(i) Cormorant Road, Ancaster
(ii) Dartnall Road, Hamilton.
(b) Water Haulage License Fee $182.90
3. Private Water Filling Stations
The one time permit fee for new Private Water Filling Stations approved by
the General Manager of Public Works is $1,075.80 and is payable upon
permit application.
The annual permit fee for both existing Private Water Filling Stations and
new Private Water Filling Stations approved by the General Manager of
Public Works is $322.70 and is payable within one month of the notification
by the City.
4. Areas Outside the City of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G" to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
SCHEDULE "E"
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES*
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2010
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $77.40
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in clause 4(l)(b) of By-law R84-026, as
amended:
Size of Water Meter Fee
200 mm diameter (fire service compound) $13 ,442.00
250 mm diameter (fire service compound) $19 ,115.00
Other sizes and types Cost + 10%
Overhead
2. Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 10% Overhead
For superintending the laying of a new water service
-
(a) Regular Inspection Regular Hours $66.60
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $66.60
the Regular lnspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
-
(c) Regular Inspection After Hours $10 2.20
Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee (not including new water
meter, if required):
(a) service replacement of public portion from Omm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $285.1 0
(b) inspection of service replacement of private portion from
Omm to and including 20mm $215.10
(c) service size upgrade additional fee (based on size and length)
(a) For tuming water off (Regular Hours)
(b) For turning water off (After Hours)
(a) For tuming water on (Regular Hours)
(b) For turning water on (After Hours)
(a) For turning water off & on during the same call (Regular Hours) $10 0.00
(b) For turning water off & on during the same call (After Hours) $15 2.00
Discharge of Special Water Service Agreements $360.40
Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes (hydrant flow test) $96.80
For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):**
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnection fee
(a) ConnectionIDisconnection Fee - Regular Hours $18 8.30lvisit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee - After Hours $285.1 Olvisit
(c) Additional per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental $10.70/day
11. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter and Attachments:
12. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $12 5.00
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $1 85.00
100 mm plus diameter Cost + 10%
overhead
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) Cost +I0 %
overhead
13. For service calls other than previously specified:
(a) Service Call - Regular Hours
-
(b) Service Call After Hours
14. Meter Open By-pass 2 x average daily consumption
15. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
16. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge cost plus 33%
overhead
17. General Administration Fees
Extra or lost card replacement for water filling stations
Account Review
General Request (per hour)
NSF Cheque
Permit Cancellation Administration Fee
Permit Renewal Fee
Notes to Schedule "E":
*
Plus all applicable taxes.
**
This service requires a $5,647.90 deposit ($269.00 usage deposit and
$5,378.90 damage deposit).
"Regular Hours" means 8:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
"After Hours" means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday, Sunday,
public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized or required by
law to be closed.
SCHEDULE "G"
TABLE OF METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1,2010
(Referred to in sub-sections 12(2), (3) & (4) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Charge
The minimum charge per billing period is as follows:
Minimum
Residential Approved Volume1 Approved Minimum
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Rate Bi-Monthly Monthly Rate VolumelMonth
15mm to
20mm $1 5.50 10 m3 $7.75 5 m3
Commercial Meter Size
16 mm $15 .50 10 m3 $7.75 5 m3
20 mm $15 .50 10 m3 $7.75 5 m3
25 mm $81.98 30 m3 $40.99 15 m3
38 mm $91.06 30 m3 $45.53 15 m3
50 mm $10 8.30 30 m3 $54.1 5 15 m3
75 mm $18 7.62 30 m3 $93.81 15 m3
100 mm $240.30 30 m3 $120.15 15 m3
150 mm $425.22 30 m3 $212.61 15 m3
200 mm $734.22 30 m3 $367.1 1 15 m3
250 mm $1,130.32 30 m3 $565.1 6 15 m3
HaldimandlHalton Meter Size
50 mm $16 2.44 30 m3 $ 81.22 15 m3
100 mm $360.46 30 m3 $180.23 15 m3
150 mm $637.84 30 m3 $318.92 15 m3
200 mm $1,101.30 30 m3 $550.65 15 m3
6) Consumption Charge
The consumption charge for the amount of water used over and above the
minimum volume per bi-monthly billing is as follows:
Minimum
Consumption Charge Per
pi-Monthly
Cubic Metre
Volume
Residential 10 m3 $1.0802 > 10 m3
10 m3
Small Commercial $1.0802> 10m3
Commercial 1 Industrial 30 m3 $1.0802 > 30 m3
Haldimand, Halton & Water Haulers 30 m3 $1.6214 > 30 m3
C) SANITARY SURCHARGE IS 100% OF WATER CONSUMPTION (applies
to all metered residential, commercial, industrial and institutional water
consumption).



Content from 09261 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272pdf:
Authority: Item 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-034 (FCS09102/PW09100)
CM: December 9, 2009 and
Item 11, Audit and Administration
Committee Report 09-012 ((FCS09058)
CM: September 9, 2009
Bill No. 261
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09- 261
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2010
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 9th day of December, 2009 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of Committee of the Whole Report 09-034 and did
authorize the 2010 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the fees
and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2010 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
AND WHEREAS on the 16th day of September, 2009, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 11 of Audit and Administration Committee Report
09-012 and did approve the Wastewater Abatement Program amendment
described herein.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Sub-section l(f) of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and the
,
following substituted:
2
(f) "Commercial" means of or pertaining to retail and wholesale sales of
food grown on a farm, manufactured goods and/or services;"
2. Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2010, except that section 1
,
shall be deemed to have come into force on September 16, 2009.
In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, are
,
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED and ENACTED this 9th day of December, 2009.
Fr ger
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE "B"
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
(a) Initial Application Processing Fee $114.78 plus applicable
.
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $344.15 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $458.92 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
,
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (before phase in)
F% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (after phase in)
Step 1: A-B=C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A- D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
.
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
4
actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the
e ,,..
City during the previous quarter
H= volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
I= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2010 is $1.0802 per cubic meter of water)
$J= dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: GxF%=H
Step 6: Hxl=$J



Content from 09262 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026pdf:
Authority: Item 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09- 02/PW091 00)
034 (FCS091
CM: December 9, 2009
Bil No. 262
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09- 262
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2010 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on February 15, 2006, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 06-026, which by-law came into force and effect on
March 1 , 2006 and may be known and referred to as "The Sewer and Drain By-
law
Municipal Act, 2001 O. 2001,
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the
25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipalitys property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 9 day of December, 2009, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of Committee of the Whole Report 09-034 and did
authorize the 2010 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the fees
and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2010 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Schedule "A" to By-law No. 06-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2010.
In all other respects, the contents of By- law No. 06-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
this 9 day of December, 2009.
PASSED and ENACTED
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor
Schedule "A to By-law 06-026
Page 1 of 2
SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
Effective January 1 , 2010
Basic Fee for any sewer permit $57.
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1) of this Schedule " , the following
fees are payable:
(a) for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public portion, or for
either one individually $24.
(b) for a Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $24.
(c) for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $24.
(d) for a Catch basin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $24.
(e) inspect Storm Sewer $24.
inspect Sanitary Sewer $24.
(f)
Discharge of Special Service Agreements $241.
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $241 .
Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $36.
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
Service Charge for Missed Appointments $107.
and Inspections Not Ready.
(a) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Regular Hours $506.
(b) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - After Hours $418.
Schedule "A to By-law 06-026
Page 2 of 2
(c) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $508.
(d) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $605.
(e) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation- Regular Hours $418.
(f) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $495.
N1otes. t o Schedule
All fees and charges in this schedule are subject to all applicable taxes.
2. "
Regular Hours" means 7 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
3. "
After Hours" means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday,
Sunday, public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized
or required by law to be closed.
4. "
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning" means services to relieve blockage( s) in the
Sewer Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer service.
5. "
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate" means services to locate any
Defects in the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television inspection.
6. "
Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation" means services to complete
thorough cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer Lateral.
7. "
Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation" means services related to an
unsuccessful attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.



Content from 09263 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: ltem 3, Committee of the Whole
Report 09-034 (FCSO9102/PW09100)
CM: December 9,2009
Bill No. 263
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 09- 263
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150, as amended,
and Implement the 2010 Sewer Use Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law No. 04-150, known and referred to as the "Sewer Use By-law",
which By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the gth day of December, 2009, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of ltem 3 of Committee of the Whole Report 09-034 and did
authorize the 2010 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the sewer
use fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2010 sewer use fees and charges set out herein
has been given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public
Notice Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. By-law No. 04-150 is amended by adding the following subsection 9(2)
immediately after subsection 9(1):
(2) Upon request, subject to the approval of the General Manager of
Public Works and the payment of the prescribed wastewater
sampling fees set out in Schedule "D" to this By-law, the City will
provide sampling services to the requesting person for the purpose
2
of determining the characteristics or contents of the
sewage which is the subject of the request.
2. Subsection lO(1) of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by striking out the
word "and" in the second line of the subsection before the word "drainage"
and substituting the word "land".
3. Schedule "D" to By-law No. 04-15 0 is repealed and Schedule "D" attached
to this by-law is substituted therefor.
4. This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2010.
5. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 04-150, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED and ENACTED this gthd ay of December, 2009.
R se terini
Acting City Clerk
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1S T, 2010
1. Annual permit to discharge hauled sewage $271.78*
2. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
discharge: discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant compliant
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 m3 or
gallons or any part any part thereof $ 40.90* $40.90*
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 40.90* $81.80*
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $81.80* $12 2.71*
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $12 2.71 * $204.49*
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $1 63.61* $245.39*
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10 000 imperial m3
gallons
*plus applicable taxes
b) Holding Tanks of Recreational Vehicles
3. Overstrength Discharge Fees
Parameter Fee (centslkg)
B.O.D. $0.6525*
Suspended Solids $0.5219 *
Solvent Extractable Matter $0.5480*
Kjeldahl Nitrogen $1.9868*
phosphorus $1.3976*
4. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement
5. Spills Response Fee (per hour) $ 57.96*
6. Information Request Fee $12 3.31*
7. Wastewater Sampling Fees
(a) Wastewater Sampling Vehicle Fee (per day) $ 5.50*
(b) Wastewater Sampling Equipment Fee (per day) $ 15.00*
(c) Wastewater Sampling Technician Fee (per hour) $ 38.79*
*plus applicable taxes



Content from 09267 omb file no pl060290  to amend zoning bylaws of the former area municipalitiespdf:
/)
ISSUE DATE:
'7r
PL060290
Dee 10, 2009
Ontario
Ontario Municipal Board
Commission des affaires municipales de l'Ontario
" 09-267
Victor J Veri and Fred Spencer have appealed to the Ontario Municipal Board under
subsection 34(19)" of the Planning Act RS.O. 1990, c. P. , as amended , against
Zoning By-law 06-038 of the City of Hamilton
OMB File No. R060068
B E FOR E:
J. McKenzie Thursday, the 10 day
Vice Chair of December, 2009
UPON APPEAL TO THIS BOARD, and the Board having been advised by Senior
Council to the City of Hamilton that sections were either omitted or misnumbered from
By-law 06-038, which was included with Decision/Oraer 0634, dated March 13, 2007;
THE BOARD ORDERS that Decision/Order 0634 is hereby amended by replacing By-
law 06-038 with the, attached modified By-law;
In all other respects the Decision remains the sam
?f f .
4..
1rA'//.--
SECRETARY
, '
, " , " , . , "
Bil No.
267
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-
LAW NO. OQ-?h7
To Amend:
Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster);
Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas);
Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flam borough);
Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook);
Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton);
Zoning By-law No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek), and
Zoning By-law No. 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
Respecting:
PROHIBITION OF USE OF LAND WITHOUT ADEQUATE SERVICES
City of Hamilton Act. 1999. Statutes of Ontario, 1999 Chap.
WHEREAS the
, Sch. C. did incorporate, as of January 1 2001, the municipality "City of
Hamilton
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the successor to the former area
municipalities known as the ''The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster 'The
Corporation of the Town of Dundas The Corp.oation of the Town of
Flamborough" The Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook" The Corporation
of the City of Hamilton , and 'The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek", and is
the successor to the former Regional Municipality, namely, liThe Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth"
City of Hamilton Act. 1999. provides that the Zoning
AND WHEREAS the
By-laws and Offcial Plans of the former area municipalities and the Offcial Plan
the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth continue in force in the
City of Hamilton until subsequently amended or repealed by the Council of the City
of Hamilton;
the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster
AND WHEREAS
passed Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) on the 22nd day of June 1987
which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order on the 23rd
day of January, 1989;
the Council of The Corporation of the Town of Dundas
AND WHEREAS
passed Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas) on the 22nd day of May 1986, which
by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 10th day
of May 1988;
the
Council of The Corporation of the Town of
AND WHEREAS
Flamborough passed Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough) on the 5th day of
November 1990, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by
Order dated the 21st day of December 1992;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Township of
Glanbrook passed Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook) on the 16th day of March
1992, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated
the 31st day of May 1993;
AND WHEREAS the Council of The Corporation of the Cit of Hamilton
passed Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) on the 25th day of July 1950, which by-
. law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by Order dated the 7th day of
Decemcer 1951, (File No. P. C. 3821);
the Council of The Corporation of the City of Stoney
AND WHEREAS
Creek passed Zoning By-law No. 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) on the 8th day of
December 1992, which by-law was approved by the Ontario Municipal Board by
Order dated the 31st day of May, 1994;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton passed Zoning By-
law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton) on the 25th day of May, 2005 which came into
effect on the same date;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is in conformity with the Official Plan of the
former City of Hamilton, the Offcial Plan of the former Town of Ancaster, the
Official Plan of the former Town of Dundas, the Official Plan of the former Town
of Flamborough, the Official Plan of the former Township of Glanbrook, the
Official Plan of the City of Stoney Creek);
the Council of the City of Hamilton, in adopting Item
RepoANrD WtH EREAS
of the Planning and Economic Development Committee at its meeting
day of
held on the recommended that Zoning By-law No. 87-57 (Ancaster),
Zoning By-law No. 3581-86 (Dundas), Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough),
Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook), Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton), Zoning
By-law 3692-92 (Stoney Creek), and Zoning By- law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
be amended as hereinafter provided.
AND WHEREAS the owner of any land, building or structure affected by this
by-law may appear as a delegation before the appropriate Committee of Council in
accordance with the City's Procedural By-law;
Planning Act the Committee of
AND WHEREAS under Section 45(1) of the
Adjustment, upon the application of the owner of any land, building or structure
affected by this by-law, may authorize such minor variance from the provisions of
this by-law as in its opinion is desirable for the appropriate development or use of
the land, building or structure, if in the opinion of the Committee of Adjustment the
general intent and purpose of this by-law and the offcial
plan are maintained
herein referred to as a "minor variance application
AND WHEREAS in applying the Planning Act test to decide a minor
variance application, the Committee of Adjustment may consider such evidence as
it deems relevant, including, but not limited to, the position of the General Manager
of the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his or her
designate and any other engineering opinions/reports presented to it;
the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
NOW THEREFORE
Town of Ancaster
(a) Section 7 of Zoning By- law No. 87-57 (Ancaster) is hereby amended
by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
29
Except for Section 7.27 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ii) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for
buildings or structures are existing
or have been
provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Offcial and all regulatory approvals
have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
Hi)
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
General Manager of the
received to the satisfaction of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate.
Town of Dundas
86
(a) Section 6 of Zoning By-law No. 3581- (Dundas) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
25
Except for Section 6.19.3a - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used or
occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
, an
where such services are not required or contemplated
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
regulatory approvals have been
Building Offcial and all
General Manager of the
received to the satisfaction of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate.
Town of Flamborough
(a) Section 5 of Zoning By-law No. 90-145-Z (Flamborough) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
37
Except for Section 5.35 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
where such services are not , an
ii) required or contemplated
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Offcial and all regulatory approvals have been
the General Manager of the
received to the satisfaction of
Planning and Economic Development Departent and/or his
or her designate; and
ii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate.
Township of Glanbrook
(a) Section 7 of Zoning By-law No. 464 (Glanbrook) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
42
Except for Section 7.40 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used or
occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the
Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate; or
where such services are not required or contemplated, an
ii)
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Offcial and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
Hi)
the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-
lieu of parkland in accordance with the
City of Hamilton
Parkland Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the
Planning and Economic Development Department
and/or his or her designate.
City of Hamilton
(a) Section 6 of Zoning By-law No. 6593 (Hamilton) is hereby amended
by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
(22)
Except for Section 6.(20) - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected
, used or
occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
ji) where such services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for buildings or structures are existing
or have been provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Offcial and all regulatory approvals have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
iii)
the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate.
City of Stoney Creek
(a) Section 4.4 of Zoning By-law 3692-92 (Stoney Creek) is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
ADEQUATE SERVICES
Except for Section 4.20 - Model Homes in Draft Plans of Subdivision
no buildings or structures may be erected, used or occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer systems are
existing or have been provided for in a binding and secured
development agreement and all regulatory approvals have
been received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of
the Planning and Economic Development Department and/or
his or her designate; or
where such
ii) services are not required or contemplated, an
approved waste disposal system and potable water supply to
sustain the use of land for
buildings or structures are existing
or have been
provided for to the satisfaction of the Chief
Building Offcial and all regulatory approvals
have been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate; and
ii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-
in-lieu
of parkland in accordance with the City of
Hamilton Parkland
Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of Parkland Policy has been
received to the satisfaction of the General Manager of the
Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his
or her designate.
Zoning By-law 05-200 (Downtown Hamilton)
(a) Section 4 of Zoning By- law 05-200 - General Provisions is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsection:
22 ADEQUATE SERVICES
_.--
\- . - -" -. ---- -
.- --
Except for Section 4.15 of Zoning By-law No. 05-200
(Downtown Hamilton) - Model Homes in Draft Plans of
Subdivision, no buildings or structures may be erected, used
or occupied unless:
adequate watermains, storm and sanitary sewer
systems are existing or have been provided for in a
binding and secured development agreement and all
regulatory approvals have been received to the
satisfaction of the General Manager of the Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate; or
ji) where such services are not required or contemplated,
an approved waste disposal system and potable water
supply to sustain the use of land for buildings or
strctures are existing or have been provided for to the
satisfaction of the Chief Building Ofcial and all
regulatory approvals have been received to the
the
satisfaction of the General Manager of Planning
and Economic Development Department and/or his or
her designate; and
ii) the dedication of lands for parkland or payment of cash-
in-lieu of parkland in accordance with the Cit of
Hamilton Parkland Dedication and Cash-in-lieu of
Parkland Policy has been received to the satisfaction of
the General Manager of the Planning and Economic
Development Department and/or his or her designate.
The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the
giving of
notice of the passing of this By-law Plannina Act
, in accordance with the
this 10t Deerr
PASSED and ENACTED day of , 200;9.
CI-05-



Content from 10002 to amend sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Item 4, Public Works Committee
Authority:
Report 09-015
CM: Date December 9, 2009
Bil No. 002
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-002
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and enacted By-law No. 04-150,
WHEREAS
known and referred to as the "Sewer Use By-law , which came into force on June 30,
2004;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting of December 9, 2009, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 4 of the Public Works Committee Report 09-015 and did
thereby authorize the amendments to the Sewer Use By-law contained in this By-law;
the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
NOW THEREFORE
Section 1 of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by changing the defined term
Hauled Wastewater Discharge Manifest" to "Hauled Wastewater Discharge
Declaration" and by changing all other references in this By-law from "Hauled
Wastewater Discharge Manifest" to "Hauled Wastewater Discharge Declaration
Section 1 of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by adding the following definition
after the definition of "matter" and before the definition of "NAICS"
Municipal Law Enforcement Offcer" means any person appointed by the City
Council, by the General Manager of Public Works, or under this By-law, to
administer or enforce this By-law and includes a person employed by the City whose
duties are to enforce this By-law, and also includes, for the purposes of exercising
any power of entry under this By-law, a police officer;
Section 2 of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by adding the following subsection (3):
(3) The following Schedules are attached to and form part of this By-Law:
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 2 of 8
Schedule A: Joined Sanitary-Foundation Drain Sewer Lands;
Schedule B: intentionally deleted;
Schedule C: City Locations and times for Discharge of Hauled Sewage and
Hauled Industrial Wastes;
Schedule of Fees;
Schedule D:
Schedule E: Best Management Practices (BMP) Plan;
Schedule F: Industrial Sectors;
Schedule F1: Waste Survey Report;
Schedule G: Overstrength Discharge Agreement Form (including Appendix
G);
Schedule H: Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement Form (including Appendix
H);
Schedule I: Chlorides Discharge Agreement Form (including Appendices I-
and I-B);
Schedule J: Letter of Agreement for Compliance Program;
Schedule J- Release and Indemnification Form; and
Schedule K: Compliance Program Progress Report.
Section 3 of By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the following:
SECTION 3
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
(1) The General Manager of Public Works is responsible for the administration and
enforcement of this By-law.
(2) The Citys Senior Director of Environment & Sustainable Infrastructure, the City
Director of Water and Wastewater Operations, the City s Manager of Compliance
and Regulations, and all City employees in the Environmental Monitoring and
Enforcement unit of the Environment & Sustainable Infrastructure Division of the
Public Works Department of the City of Hamilton are appointed as Municipal Law
Enforcement Offcers for the purposes of the administration and enforcement of this
By- Municipal Act 2001
law and the applicable sections of the
(3) The General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services is responsible for billing
and collecting all fees and charges described in this By-law except as otherwise
provided in this By-law.
(4) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may enter on land at any reasonable time to
inspect the discharge of any matter into the sewage works of the City or into any
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 3 of 8
other sewage system the contents of which ultimately empty into the Citys sewage
works and may conduct test and take samples for this purpose.
(5) A Municipal Law Enforcement Offcer may enter on land at any reasonable time for
the purpose of carrying out an inspection to determine whether or not the following
are being complied with:
this By-law;
any direction, requirement or order of the City made under this By-law; or
Municipal Act. 2001 in respect of a
an order made under section 431 of the
contravention of this By-law.
(6) For the purposes of an inspection under subsection 3(5), a Municipal Law
Enforcement Offcer may,
require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection;
inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the
purpose of making copies or extracts;
require information in writing or otherwise as required by the Municipal Law
Enforcement Offcer from any person concerning a matter related to the
inspection; and
alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert knowledge,
make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs necessary for the
purpose of the inspection.
(7) A Municipal Law Enforcement Offcer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an
order issued by a provincial judge or justice of the peace under section 438 of the
Municipal Act. 2001 where he or she has been prevented or is likely to be prevented
from carrying out an inspection under subsections 3(4), 3(5) and 3(6).
(8) If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law
has occurred, he or she may make an order requiring the person who contravened
this By-law or who caused or permitted the contravention, or the owner or occupier
of the property on which the contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening
activity.
(9) An order under subsection 3(8) shall set out:
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 4 of 8
reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of the property on which the contravention
occurred; and
the date and time by which there must be compliance with the order, which
may be of immediate effect should the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer
determine that the circumstances warrant.
(10) a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law
If
has occurred, he or she may make an order requiring the person who contravened
this By-law or who caused or permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of
the property on which the contravention occurred to do the work to correct the
contravention.
(11 ) An order under subsection 3(10) shall set out:
reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of the property on which the contravention
occurred; and
the work to be completed which may include but is not limited to requiring
that:
(a) prior to performing any work, all necessary permits or other approvals be
applied for and obtained;
(b) examinations or tests be conducted or samples be taken for the purpose
of determining the cause of the contravention and the remedial measures
that are necessary to correct the contravention, and that such
examinations, tests or samples be supplied to the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer together with any accompanying reports required in
the order;
(c) appropriate treatment for the discharge of non-complying effluent be
provided; and
3. the date and time by which the work must be completed, which may be of
immediate effect should the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer determine that
the circumstances warrant.
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 5 of 8
(12) An order to discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection 3(9) or an
order to do work made under subsection 3(11) may be served personally or by
registered mail to the last known address of:
the owner or occupier of the property where the contravention occurred; and
such other persons affected by the order as the Municipal Law Enforcement
Officer making the order determines.
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place five business days
after the date of mailing.
(13) In addition to service given in accordance with subsection 3(12), an order to
discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection 3(9) or an order to do
work made under subsection 3(11) may be served by a Municipal Law Enforcement
Officer placing a placard containing the order in a conspicuous place on the property
where the contravention occurred.
(14) Where service cannot be given in accordance with subsection 3(12), sufficient
service is deemed to have taken place when given in accordance with subsection
3(13).
(15) No person shall remove an order, notice, direction or placard posted on a property
indicating that it was posted under this By-law, except a Municipal Law Enforcement
Officer.
(16) Where a time frame is set out in an order for carrying out any action, the Municipal
Law Enforcement Officer may extend the time for compliance beyond the
established time frame provided such extension is required and is acceptable to the
Municipal Law Enforcement Officer.
(17) Where a person does not comply with a direction or a requirement, including an
order, under this By-law to do a matter or thing, the General Manager of Public
Works, with such assistance by others as may be required, may carry out such
direction, requirement or order at the person s expense.
(18) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection 3(17) by
action or by adding the costs to the tax roll and collecting them in the same manner
as property taxes and such costs shall include an interest rate of 15 percent
commencing on the day the City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs
including the interest, are paid in full.
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 6 of 8
(19) The General Manager of Public Works is authorized to give immediate effect to any
direction, or requirement where the costs of carrying out the direction or requirement
do not exceed $10 000 and, where the costs do exceed $10 000, as the City
council may authorize.
(20) The amount of the City s costs including interest to the date payment is made in full,
constitutes a lien upon the land, upon the registration of a notice of lien upon the
land.
Subsections 12(6) and (7) of By-law NO.04-150 are deleted in their entirety.
Section 13 of By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the following:
SECTION 13
OFFENCES
13.(1) Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is, upon conviction
guilty of an offence and is liable:
on a first conviction, for each day or part of a day on which the offence
occurs or continues, to a fine of not more than $10 000; and
on any subsequent conviction, for each day or part of a day on which the
offence occurs or continues, to a fine of not more than $25 000.
(2) Despite subsection 13(1), where the person convicted is a corporation
the maximum fine in paragraph 13(1 )1. is $50 000; and
the maximum fine in paragraph 13(1)2. is $100,000.
(3)
In this By-law, subsequent conviction means a conviction for an offence, which
offence occurs after the date of conviction for an earlier offence under this By-law
under Sections 13, 14 or 15 of By-law No. 247-75 or under By-law No. R89-049.
(4) Any person who contravenes an order made under this By-law, or an officer or
who contravention by the
director of a corporation knowingly concurs in such a
corporation, is guilty of a continuing offence and upon conviction is liable to a daily
maximum of $10,000 for each day or part of a day that the
fine or penalty of a
offence continues, and despite subsections 13( 1) and 13(2), the total of all the daily
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilon
Page 7 of 8
fines imposed for an offence is not limited by the fine amounts listed in those
subsections.
(5) Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction
has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition
to any other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law, make an order
prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
Schedule G (Overstrength Discharge Agreement Form) of By-law No. 04-150 is
amended by adding the following section 16:
16. THIS AGREEMENT shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada applicable therein
and shall be treated in all respects as an Ontario contract. Any action or
proceeding relating to all matters arising out of this agreement or the
discharge of sewage described in this agreement, including all tort claims
shall be brought in an Ontario court of competent jurisdiction and any such
, Ontario office of that
action or proceeding shall be issued at the Hamilton
court and for that purpose each party irrevocably and unconditionally attorns
and submits to the jurisdiction of that Ontario court at Hamilton, Ontario.
Schedule H (Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement Form) of By-law No. 04-150 is
amended by adding the following section 14:
14. THIS AGREEMENT shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada applicable therein
and shall be treated in all respects as an Ontario contract. Any action or
proceeding relating to all matters arising out of this agreement , or the
discharge of water that has originated from a source separate from the City
potable water distribution system, as described in this agreement, including
all tort claims, shall be brought in an Ontario court of competent jurisdiction
and any such action or proceeding shall be issued at the Hamilton, Ontario
office of that court and for that purpose each party irrevocably and
unconditionally attorns and submits to the jurisdiction of that Ontario court at
Hamilton, Ontario.
Schedule I (Chlorides Discharge Agreement Form) of By-law No. 04-150 is
amended by adding the following section 15:
15. THIS AGREEMENT shall be governed by and construed in accordance with
the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada applicable therein
and shall be treated in all respects as an Ontario contract. Any action or
~~~~
-'''''
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 8 of 8
proceeding relating to all matters arising out of this agreement, or the
discharge of sewage containing chlorides in excess of 5000 millgrams/litre
as described in this agreement, including all tort claims, shall be brought in an
Ontario court of competent jurisdiction and any such action or proceeding
office of that court and for that
shall be issued at the Hamilton, Ontario
purpose each party irrevocably and unconditionally attorns and submits to the
jurisdiction of that Ontario court at Hamilton, Ontario.
10. Schedule J (Letter of Agreement for Compliance Program) of By-law No. 04-150 is
amended by adding the following section 9:
The compliance program described in this Letter of Agreement, and all
associated documentation shall be governed by and construed in
accordance with the laws of the Province of Ontario and the laws of Canada
applicable therein and shall be treated in all respects as an Ontario contract.
Any action or proceeding relating to all matters arising out of this Letter of
Agreement, or the compliance program, as described in this Letter of
Agreement, including all tort claims, shall be brought in an Ontario court of
competent jurisdiction and any such action or proceeding shall be issued at
the Hamilton, Ontario office of that court and for that purpose each party
irrevocably and unconditionally attorns and submits to the jurisdiction of that
Ontario court at Hamilon, Ontario.
11. This by-law shall be deemed to have come into force on January 1, 2010.
this11th day of January, 2010.
PASSED
\,) .f
II,
JC. /\1
Fred Eisenberger
Kevin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk



Content from 10013 to amend tree bylaws of former area municipalitiespdf:
Authority: Item 15, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 010-001 (PDO02229(d))
CM: January 27, 2010
Bill No. 013.
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-013
To Amend: By-law No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection
By-law; By-law No. 4513-99, the Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law;
By-law 4401-96, the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law; By-law No. R00-054, the
Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth
WHEREAS Council wishes to amend the appeal processes provided for in: By-law
No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection By-law; By-law No. 4513-99, the
Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law; By-law No. 4401-96, the City of Stoney
Cree Tree By-law; By-law No. R00-054, the Regional Municipality of Hamilton-
Wentworth Woodland Conservation By-law;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999 did incorporate, as of January 1st,
2001, the municipality City of Hamilton ;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is successor to the following former area
municipalities: The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster, The Corporation of the Town
of Dundas, The Corporation of the Town of Flamborough, The Corporation of the
Township of Glanbrook, The Corporation of the City of Hamilton, and The Corporation
of the City of Stoney Creek; and the successor the former Regional Municipality of
Hamilton Wentworth;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999 provides that the by-laws of the former
area municipalities and the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton Wentworth
remain in force, in respect of the part of the municipal area to which they applied on
To Amend Tree Protection By-laws
Page 2 of 7
December 31, 2000, until they expire or are repealed or amended to provide
otherwise;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
By-law No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection By-law
1. Subsection 9.1 of By-law No. 2000-118 of the Town of Ancaster is deleted and
replaced with following new subsection 9.1:
9.1 APPEALS REGARDING PERMITS
9.1.1 An appeal of the conditions imposed on a Permit or of a Permit refusal shall be
conducted as set out in the Appeal Schedule attached to and forming part of
this By-law.
2. By-law No. 2000-118 of the Town of Ancaster is amended by adding the Appeal
Schedule, attached to this By-law as Schedule A.
3. Subsections 8.2 and 9.2 of By-law No. 2000-118 of the Town of Ancaster are
deleted.
4. Sections 3 and 4 of Schedule G or By-law No. 2000-118 of the Town of
Ancaster referring to an appeal are deleted.
By-law No. 4513-99, the Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law
5. By-law No. 4513-99 of the Town of Dundas is amended by adding following
new section 5a after section 5:
5a. APPEALS
An appeal of the conditions imposed on a permit or of a permit refusal shall be
To Amend Tree Protection By-laws
Page 3 of 7
conducted as set out in the Appeal Schedule attached to and forming part of
this By-law.
6. By-law No. 4513-99 of the Town of Dundas is amended by adding the Appeal
Schedule attached to this By-law as Schedule A.
By-law No. 4401-96, the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law
7. Sections 22 and 23 of By-law No. 4401-96 of the City of Stoney Creek are
deleted and replaced by the following new section:
APPEAL TO THE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND PLANNING COMMITTEE
22. An appeal of the conditions imposed on a Permit or of a Permit refusal shall be
conducted as set out in the Appeal Schedule attached to and forming part of this
By-law.
8. By-law No. 4401-96 of the City of Stoney Creek is amended by adding the
Appeal Schedule attached to this By-law as Schedule A.
9. Subsections 29(h) and (i) and section 33 and 34 of By-law No. 4401-96 of the
City of Stoney Creek are deleted.
10. The third and fourth recitals of Schedule E of By-law No. 4401-96 of the City
of Stoney Creek referring to an appeal are deleted.
By-law No. R00-054, the Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth
11. Subsections 5(h) to (m) inclusive of By-law No. R00-054 of the Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth are deleted and replace with the following
new subsection:
To Amend Tree Protection By-laws
Page 4 of 7
5(h) An appeal of a permit refusal shall be conducted as set out in the Appeal
Schedule attached to and forming part of this By-law.
12. By-law No. R00-054 of the Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth is
amended by adding the Appeal Schedule attached to this By-law as Schedule
A. as schedule 'B'.
General
13. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 27th day of January, 2010
To Amend Tree Protection By-laws
Page 5 of 7
Schedule A
APPEAL SCHEDULE
1. For the purposes of this Sche ule:
applicant means an applicant for a permit under this By-law;
City means t e City of Hamilton incorporated as of January 1, 2001 under t e
City of Hamilton Act, 1999]
“Economic Develop ent and Planning Committee means the City of
Hamilton s Economic Development and Planning Committee or any successor
committee; and
ermit means a per it under this By-law.
2. An applicant for a per it who does not agree with the conditions imposed in a
permit or wit the refusal of a permit may appeal by requesting a hearing before
the Economic Development and Planning Committee which, in the place of City
Council, shall hear the appeal.
3. A request for a hearing by an applicant under section 2 shall be in writing,
accompanied by the applicable fee and delivered to the Clerk of Economic
Development and Planning Committee within 20 days of the date the permit is
refused. The applicant shall also include the grounds for their appeal.
4. Where a request for a hearing meeting the requirements of section 3 has been
delivered to the Clerk of the Economic Development and Planning Committee,
the hearing shall be scheduled before the Economic Development and Planning
Committee and notice of the hearing date shall be given to the applicant who
requested the hearing. The notice of hearing shall include:
(a) a statement of the time, date and purpose of the hearing; and
(b) a statement that if the applicant does not attend the hearing, the
To Amend Tree Protection By-laws
Page 6 of 7
Economic Development and Planning Committee may proceed in their
absence without notice to them.
The notice of hearing under section 4 may be given by delivering it personally
or by sending it by prepaid registered mail to the last known address of the
applicant on file with the City. Service by registered mail shall be deemed to
have taken place 5 business days after the date of mailing unless the person to
whom it is being given establishes that they, acting in good faith, through
absence, accident, illness or other cause beyond their control did not receive
the notice of appeal until a later date.
The Economic Develop ent and Planning Committee shall hold a hearing
pursuant to the Statutory Powers Procedure Act at the time, date and place set
out in the notice of hearing and the Economic Development and Planning
Committee may recommend to Council that a permit be refused or issued or
that a condition be confirmed, rescinded, varied or imposed on a permit.
The Economic Development and Planning Committee shall have regard to the
following matters, where relevant, as may be raised at a hearing:
(a) this By-law and other applicable law;
(b) circumstances and facts raised by the evidence of the parties; and
(c) whether strict application of the provisions of the By-law in the context of
the circumstances and facts raised by the evidence of the parties would
result in unusual hardship for the applicant or be inconsistent with the
general intent and purpose of this By-law.
The Economic Development and Planning Committee shall forward a report to
City Council on its final decision arising from each hearing or opportunity for a
hearing.
City Council, after considering a report of the Economic Development and
Planning Committee, may refuse or issue a permit or confirm, rescind, vary or
To Amend Tree Protection By-laws
Page 7 of 7
impose a condition on a permit, all without a hearing, having regard to the
matters considered by the Economic Development and Planning Committee,
this By-law and other applicable law.
10. After City Council has made a decision in respect of a report of the Economic
Development and Planning Committee, notice of that decision shall be sent to
the applicant by personal delivery or by registered mail to the last known
address of the applicant on file with the City.
Authority: item 11, Planning Committee
Report: 14-012 (PD02229(f))
CM: August 15, 2014
Bill No. 213
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 14-213
To Amend: By-law No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection By-law;
By-law No. 4513-99, the Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law; By-law 4401-96,
the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law; By-law No. R00-054, the Regional
Municipality of Ha ilton-Wentworth Conservation By-law
WHEREAS Council wishes to amend By-law No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree
Protection By-law; By-law No. 4513-99, the Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law;
By-law No. 4401-96, the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law; and By-law No. R00-054,
the Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth Woodland Conservation By-law;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999 did incorporate, as of January 1, 2001,
t e municipality "City of Hamilton ;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is successor to the following former area
municipalities: The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster, The Corporation of the Town
of Dundas, The Corporation of the Town of Flamborough, The Corporation of the
Township of Glanbrook, The Corporation of the City of Hamilton, and The Corporation
of the City of Stoney Creek; and the successor the former Regional Municipality of
Hamilton Wentworth;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999 provides that the By-laws of the former
area municipalities and the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth remain
in force, in respect of the part of the municipal area to which they applied on December
31, 2000, until they expire or are repealed or a ended to provide otherwise.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
By-law No. 2000-118. the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection By-law:
1. Section 3.3 of By-law No. 2000-118 of the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection
By-law is deleted and replaced with the following new Section 3.3:
To Amend: By-law No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection By-law; By-law No. 4513-99, the
Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law; By-law 4401-96, the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law; By-law
No. R00-054, the Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentwort Conservation By-law
Page 2 of 4
3.3 COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER STATUTES AND BY-LAWS
3.3.1 The provisions of this By-law apply in addition to the provisions contained
in any other applicable By-laws of the City of Hamilton or applicable
provincial or federal statutes or regulations.
3.3.2 In the event of a conflict between this By-law and any other applicable
By-law of the City of Hamilton:
(i) where one or more conflicting provisions provides for public health
or safety, then the provision which is most protective of public
health or safety prevails; or,
(ii) where none of the conflicting provisions provides for public health
or safety, then the provision which is most protective of trees
prevails.
By-law No. 4513-99, the Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law:
2. Section 3 of By-law No. 4513-99 of the Town of Dundas is amended by adding
the following new Sub-section 3(g):
(g) (i) The provisions of this By-law apply in addition to the provisions
contained in any other applicable By-laws of the City of Hamilton or
applicable provincial or federal statutes or regulations.
(ii) In the event of a conflict between this By-law and any other
applicable By-law of the City of Hamilton:
1. where one or more conflicting provisions provides for public
health or safety, then the provision which is most protective
of public health or safety prevails; or,
2. where none of the conflicting provisions provides for public
health or safety, then the provision which is most protective
'of trees prevails.
By-law No. 4401-96, the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law:
3. The first Recital of By-law No. 4401-99 of the City of Stoney Cree is amended
by deleting the words and prescribing fees for the permit .
4. Section 4 of By-law No. 4401-99 of the City of Stoney Creek is deleted and
replaced by the following new Section 4:
To Amend: By-law No. 2000-118, theTown of AncasterTree Protection By-law; By-law No. 4513-99, the
Town of Dundas Tree Protection By-law; By-law 4401-96, the City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law; By-law
No. R00-O54, t e Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth Conservation By-law
Page 3 of 4
4. (a) The provisions of this By-law apply in addition to the provisions
contained in any other applicable By-laws of the City of Hamilton
or applicable provincial or federal statutes or regulations.
(b) In the event of a conflict between this By-law and any other
applicable By-law of the City of Hamilton;
(i) where one or more conflicting provisions provides for public
health or safety, then the provision which is most protective
of public health or safety prevails; or,
(ii) where none of the conflicting provisions provides for public
health or safety, then the provision which is most protective
of trees prevails.
5. Section 17 of By-law No. 4401-99 of the City of Stoney Creek is deleted and
replaced with the following new section 17:
17. Where the person injuring or destroying the trees is not the owner, the
applicant for a permit under this by-law shall provide proof of public and
general liability insurance to the satisfaction of the City Clerk upon
submitting the application.
6. Section 36 of By-law No. 4401 -99 of the City of Stoney Creek is deleted.
7. Schedule A of By-law No. 4401 -99 of the City of Stoney Creek is deleted.
8. Schedule C of By-law No. 4401-99 of the City of Stoney Creek is amended by
deleting the words "and shall pay the required fees as set out in Schedule A of
this by-law from the third paragraph.
By-law No. R00-054, the Re ional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth:
9. Section 2 of By-law No. R00-054 of the Regional. Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth is amended by adding the following new Sub-section 2(3):
(3) (a) The provisions of this By-law apply in addition to the provisions
contained in any other applicable By-laws of the City of Hamilton or
applicable provincial or federal statutes or regulations.
(b) In the event of a conflict between this By-law and any other
applicable By-law of the City of Hamilton:
(i) where one or more conflicting provisions provides for public
health or safety, then the provision which is most protective
of public health or safety prevails; or,
To Amend: By-law No. 2000-118, the Town of Ancaster Tree Protection By-law; By-law No. 4513-99, the
Town of Dundas' Tree Protection By-law; By-law 4401-96, t e City of Stoney Creek Tree By-law; By-law
No. R00-054, t e Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentwort Conservation By-law
Page 4 of 4
(ii) where none of the conflicting provisions provides for public
health or safety, then the provision which is most protective
of trees prevails.
10. This By-law comes into force on the date of its passing.
PASSED this 15th day of August, 2014.



Content from 10030 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026pdf:
Authority: Motion 7.
CM: February 10, 2010
Bil No. 030
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-030
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended, and To
Amend By-law No. 09-264, A By-law To Establish the 2010 Water and
Wastewater Fees and Charges For Services, Activities and Use of Property
Provided by the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton enacted By-law No. 06-026, The
Sewer and Drain By-law and By-law No. 09-264 to Establish the 2010 Water and
Wastewater Fees and Charges;
AND WHEREAS an error appears in the Charges established for regular and
after hours partial sewer lateral cleaning in Schedule "A" to By-law No. 06-026
as amended and in Schedule "B" to By-law No. 09-264;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilon enacts as follows:
Page 1 of Schedule "A" to By-law No. 06-026, as amended, is deleted and
replaced with the attached new page 1.
Page 6 of Schedule "B" to By-law No. 09-264, is deleted and replaced with
the attached new page 6.
This By-law is deemed to come into force on January 1 , 2010
PASSED this 10 of February, 2010
Fred Eisenberger evin C. Christenson
Mayor City Clerk
Schedule "A to By-law 06-026
Page 1 of 2
SCHEDULE
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
Effective January 1 , 2010
Basic Fee for any sewer permit $57.
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1) of this Schedule " , the following
fees are payable:
(a) for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral- Private Portion and
a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public portion, or for
either one individually $24.
(b) for a Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $24.
(c) for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $24.
(d) for a Catch basin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $24.
(e) inspect Storm Sewer $24.
inspect Sanitary Sewer $24.
(f)
Discharge of Special Service Agreements $241 .
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $241 .
Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $36.
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
Service Charge for Missed Appointments $107.
and Inspections Not Ready.
(a) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Regular Hours $418.
(b) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - After Hours $506.
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 09-264
6 of 11
WATER AND WASTEWATER FEES AND CHARGES
Effective January 1, 2010
Department: PUBLIC WORKS
Division: WATERWORKS, WASTEWATER & STORM
B: SEWER AND DRAN BY-LAW 06-026, AS AMENDED, FEES AND CHARGES, CONTINUED
2010
Fee or
Service Offered Charge
Partial Sewer Lateral CleaninQ - ReQular Hours $418.
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - After Hours $506.
Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $508.
Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $605.
Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $418.
Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $495.
Note:
1. "
Regular Hours" means 7 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. inclusive. Monday to
Friday
2. "
After Hours" means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a
Saturday, Sunday, public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario
are authorized or required by law to be closed.
3. "
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning" means services to relieve
blockage(s) in the Sewer Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer
service
4. "
Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate" means services to locate
any Defects in the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television
inspection.
5. "
Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation" means services to complete a
thorough cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer
Lateral.
6. "
Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigaton" means services related to
an unsuccessful attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.



Content from 10037 to amend zoning bylaw no 05200pdf:
Authority: Item 11, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report: 10-004 (PED1 0030)
CM: February 24, 2010
Bil No. 037
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 1 0-037
To Amend Zoning By-law No. 05-200 Respecting lands located at 250, 262 and
270 Spring brook Avenue, Ancaster
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply to
the different areas incorporated into the City by City of Hamilton Act
virtue of the
1999, Statutes of Ontario, 1999, Chap. 14;
is the
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of By-law No. 05-200;
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively deal
with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law No. 05-200, came
into force on May 25, 2005;
AND WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton, in adopting Item 11 of Report 10-
004 of the Economic Development and Planning Committee, at its meeting held on
the 24 day of February, 2010, recommended that Zoning By-law No. 05-200, be
amended as hereinafter provided;
AND WHEREAS this By-law is in conformity with the Official Plan of the City of
Hamilton (the Official Plan of the former Town of Ancaster), in accordance with the
Planninq Act.
provisions of the
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
That Schedule " , Map No. 1284 of By-law 05-200, is amended by zoning the
lands Conservation/Hazard Lands "P5", the extent and boundaries of which are
shown as "Block 1" on a plan hereto annexed as Schedule "
By-law Respecting 250, 262 and 270 Springbrook Avenue, Ancaster
(Page 2 of 3)
That the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
notice of the passing of this by-law Planninq Act.
, in accordance with the
this 24 day of February, 2010.
PASSED
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor
ZAC-07-061
By-law Respecting 250, 262 and 270 Springbrook Avenue, Ancaster
This is Schedule "A" to By-Law No. 10-037
Passed the ..2Ath... day of ....f.ebtlar.y....., 2010
Subject Propert
Schedule "
250, 262, and 270 Springbrook Avenue, Ancaster
Block 1: Lands to be Zoned Conservation/Hazard
Lands "P5" Zone
Map Forming Part of
By-Law No. 1 0- 037 Refer to By-Law 87-
to Amend By-law No.05-200
Map 1284
Scale: File Name/Number.
ZAC-07-061/ 251200710
Date: PlannerfTechnician:
November 16, 2009 CB / MB
Hamilton
PLANNING AND ECONOMIC DEVLOPMENT DEPARTENT



Content from 10103 backflow prevention bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
A By-law Respecting the Prevention of Backflow
into the Water Distribution System of the City of Hamilton
BY-LAW NO. 10-103
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-
laws listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience
only and is not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate reference to the By-
law, certified copies should be obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
Office Consolidation as of September 20, 2021
A By-law Respecting the Prevention of Backflow
into the Water Distribution System
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 10-103
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-Law No: Effective Date:
19-057 March 27, 2019 Update to definitions
Authority: Item 7, Public Works Committee
Report 10-007 (PW09087(b))
CM: May 12, 2010
Bill No. 103
CITY OF HAMILTON
By-law No. 10-103
A By-law Respecting the Prevention of Backflow
into the Water Distribution System of the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton desires to prevent the flow of water, other
liquids, chemicals or substances back into the drinking water system for which the City of
Hamilton is responsible;
AND WHEREAS sections 8, 9, and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, (the
“Municipal Act, 2001”), authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws that are necessary or
desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 4 through 8 of subsection
10(2) authorize by-laws respecting: public assets of the municipality; economic, social and
environmental well-being of the municipality; health, safety and well-being of persons;
services and things that the municipality is authorized to provide and protection of persons
and property, including consumer protection;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to
pass by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of Hamilton
passed under that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton, amongst
other things, to delegate its authority, to impose fees and charges on persons for services or
activities provided or done by or on behalf of it, to provide for inspections and inspection
orders, and to make orders to discontinue activity or to do work;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1.0 DEFINITIONS
In this By-law:
“ASSE” means American Society of Sanitary Engineers;
“Authorized Functions List” means the list of functions and the persons authorized to carry
out such functions as set out in Schedule A;
3
“Auxiliary Water Supply” means any water source or system, other than the Potable Water
supplied by the City’s Water Distribution System, that may be available in a Building or
Structure, or on any Property;
“AWWA” means American Water Works Association;
“Backflow” means a flowing back or reversal of the normal direction of flow;
“Backflow Prevention” means the prevention of the flow of water, other liquids, chemicals or
substances back into the water being supplied by the City’s Water Distribution System;
“Backflow Prevention Device” means a device that prevents Backflow into the City’s Water
Distribution System and includes all valves and test ports approved by the CSA Standard;
“Building” has the same meaning as set out in the Building Code Act, 1992 S.O. 1992, c.23;
“Building Code” means the Building Code, O. Reg.332/12, made under the Building Code
Act, 1992, S.O. 1992, c. 23;
“City” means the geographical area of the City of Hamilton or the municipal corporation as
the context requires;
“Cross Connection” means any actual or potential connection between a Potable Water
system and any source of pollution or contamination;
“Cross Connection Control Manual” means the AWWA Canadian Cross Connection Control
Manual, Edition #1, 2007, as amended from time to time, or successor thereof;
“Cross Connection Survey Form” means the document to be completed by a person listed
on the Authorized Functions List, in the form prescribed by the General Manager from time
to time;
“CSA Standard” means the CAN/CSA B-64 Series published by the Canadian Standards
Association, in effect at the time of the enactment of this By-law, and as amended from time
to time, or successor thereof;
“Fire Protection System” means any system within a Building or Structure for the
suppression of a fire, including but not limited to any system consisting of a water sprinkler
system or dry foam, or a system described in the CSA Standard;
”General Manager” means the General Manager of Public Works for the City or the persons
the General Manager may designate from time to time to act in his or her stead for purposes
of this By-law, or successor;
“High or Severe Hazard” means any Cross Connection involving any substance that could
be a danger to health and includes, but is not limited to, Cross Connections for
establishments involving chemical usage, high hazard uses as defined by the Building Code
or “high or severe hazard” as defined in the CSA Standard and any use where Backflow
Prevention is deemed required by the General Manager;
4
“Irrigation System” means artificially supplying land with water for agriculture or landscaping,
usually by means such as pipes and sprinklers;
“Municipal Service” means the portion of the water service pipe located on City-owned
Property;
“Municipal Law Enforcement Officer” means any person appointed by the City’s Council or
by the General Manager to administer or enforce this By-law and includes a person
employed by the City whose duties are to enforce this By-law, and also includes, for the
purposes of exercising any power of entry under this By-law, a police officer;
“Owner” means the registered owner or owners of a Property or their authorized agent(s),
but does not include a mortgagee unless the mortgagee is in possession of the Property;
“Potable Water” means water that is fit for human consumption;
“Premise Isolation” means the prevention of Backflow into the City’s Water Distribution
System from an Owner’s Building, Structure or Property by the installation of a suitable
Backflow Prevention Device at the entrance of such Building, Structure or Property;
“Private Service” means the portion of the water service pipe located on private Property,
including the service valve;
“Property” includes both public and private lands, including but not limited to facilities where
a boat or mobile home can connect to a Private Service or Municipal Service, and which are
located within the geographic area of the City;
“Self-Assessed Survey” means the document to be completed by the Owner of the Property,
in the form prescribed by the General Manager from time to time;
“Small Private Service” means a Private Service that is 38 mm in diameter or smaller;
“Structure” means anything constructed or built permanently or temporarily which is
provided with a source of Potable Water, including but not limited to a boat or mobile
home;
“Test Report” means the document to be completed by a person listed on the Authorized
Functions List, in the form prescribed by the General Manager from time to time;
“Water Meter” means a device or mechanism which is owned by the City for the purpose of
measuring the flow or quantity, or both, of water;
“Water Distribution System” means the buildings, structures, plant, machinery, equipment,
appurtenances, devices, conduits, intakes, outlets, underground pipelines and installations,
and other works designed for the transmission, distribution and storage of Potable Water by
the City, and includes lands occupied for such purposes and uses.
2.0 APPLICATION AND INTERPRETATION OF BY-LAW
2.1 This By-law applies to all industrial, commercial, institutional and multi-residential
5
Buildings and Structures, whether existing or proposed, except Buildings with
residential occupancies within the scope of Part 9 of the Building Code, located on a
Property.
2.2 Despite subsection 2.1, this By-law also applies where the General Manager
determines that a condition exists in any Building or Structure which may be
hazardous or detrimental to the City’s Water Distribution System.
2.3 In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this By-law and the provisions of
any other statute, regulation or by-law, the provisions that are the most restrictive
prevail.
2.4 The necessary grammatical changes required to make the provisions of this By-law
applicable to corporations, partnerships, trusts and individuals, male or female, and
to include the singular or plural meaning where the context so requires, shall in all
cases be assumed as though fully expressed.
2.5 The following Schedules are attached to and form part of this By-Law:
Schedule A – Authorized Functions List
Schedule B – City Registration Requirements for Persons on Authorized Functions
List
2.6 The insertion of headings and the division of this By-law into sections and
subsections are for convenience of reference only and shall not affect the
interpretation thereof.
2.7 Any reference in this By-law to any statutes, regulations or by-laws shall be deemed
to be a reference to such statutes, regulations or by-laws, as amended, restated or
replaced from time to time.
2.8 Where a court of competent jurisdiction declares any section or part of a section of this
By-law invalid, the remainder of this By-law shall continue in force unless the court
makes an order to the contrary.
3.0 BACKFLOW PREVENTION
3.1 No person shall connect, permit to be connected, or allow to remain connected to the
City’s Water Distribution System, any piping, fixture, fitting, container, appliance,
vehicle, machine or the like in a manner which may under any circumstance allow
water, waste water or any other liquid, chemical or substance to enter such Water
Distribution System, except in compliance with the provisions of this By-law.
3.2 Every Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies, shall ensure that a Backflow
Prevention Device is installed in respect of Premise Isolation in every Building or
Structure supplied by the City’s Water Distribution System, and in accordance with
the timetable set out in section 14.0.
6
3.3. Every Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies and on which an Irrigation
System is located, shall ensure that such Irrigation System is protected against
Backflow in accordance with the CSA Standard.
3.4 Where there is a Fire Protection System within a Building or Structure, the Owner of
the Property shall ensure that such Building or Structure is protected against
Backflow in accordance with the CSA Standard, and in doing so the Backflow
Prevention Device shall be either a double check valve assembly or a reduced
pressure principle.
3.5 Despite subsections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4, the Owner of a Property to which this By-law
applies is not required to comply with the provisions of those subsections where:
3.5.1 the Property has a Small Private Service;
3.5.2 the Owner has completed and submitted to the City a Self-Assessed Survey
in accordance with this By-law; and
3.5.3 the degree of hazard on the Property is not a High or Severe Hazard
and the property is not one which requires Premise Isolation under the
Building Code.
3.6 No person shall connect, permit to be connected, or allow to remain connected to the
City’s Water Distribution System any Auxiliary Water Supply unless adequate
Backflow Prevention Devices are installed and the prior written approval of the
General Manager is provided.
4.0 PERSONS PERMITTED TO CARRY OUT WORK
4.1 No person, other than those persons described on the Authorized Functions List, may
carry out any of the authorized functions set out on the Authorized Functions List.
4.2 No person listed on the Authorized Functions List shall carry out any of the
corresponding authorized functions unless the person has registered with the City,
provided all requested documentation to the City, paid the applicable fee and received
a City registration number, all in accordance with the Table set out in Schedule B.
4.3 The registration with the City referred to in subsection 4.2 is an annual requirement.
4.4 No person shall submit any documentation to the City as part of the registration
process that contains inaccurate or false information.
5.0 APPLICATION OF CSA STANDARD
5.1 Except as otherwise set out in this By-law, the installation, maintenance and testing
of Backflow Prevention Devices shall be in accordance with the CSA Standard.
5.2 In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this By-law and the CSA Standard,
the provisions of this By-law shall prevail.
7
6.0 ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
Administration and Enforcement
6.1 The General Manager is responsible for the administration of this By-law, including
prescribing the content of any forms or other documents required under this By-law
from time to time.
6.2 All Municipal Law Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce this By-law.
6.3 The General Manager is authorized to delegate the responsibility for the
administration of this By-law to any employee or agent of the Hamilton Water
Division of the Public Works Department of the City.
6.4 Fees under this By-law shall be as set out in the City’s Water and Wastewater Fees
and Charges By-law.
6.5 A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may enter on land at any reasonable time for
the purpose of carrying out an inspection to determine whether or not the following
are being complied with:
6.5.1 this By-law;
6.5.2 any direction, requirement or order of the City made under this By-law; or
6.5.3 an order made under section 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001 in respect of a
contravention of this By-law.
6.6 For the purposes of an inspection under subsection 6.5, a Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer may,
6.6.1 require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection;
6.6.2 inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the
purpose of making copies or extracts;
6.6.3 require information in writing or otherwise as required by the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer from any person concerning a matter related to the
inspection; and
6.6.4 alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert
knowledge, make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs
necessary for the purpose of the inspection.
6.7 A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an
order issued by a provincial judge or justice of the peace under section 438 of the
Municipal Act, 2001 where he or she has been prevented or is likely to be prevented
from carrying out an inspection under subsections 6.5 and 6.6.
6.8 If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law
has occurred, he or she may make an order requiring the person who contravened
8
this By-law or who caused or permitted the contravention, or the Owner or occupier
of the Property on which the contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening
activity.
6.9 An order under subsection 6.8 shall set out:
6.9.1 reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of the Property on which the contravention
occurred; and
6.9.2 the date and time by which there must be compliance with the order, which
may be of immediate effect should the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer
determine that the circumstances warrant.
6.10 If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law
has occurred, he or she may make an order requiring the person who contravened
this By-law or who caused or permitted the contravention or the Owner or occupier of
the Property on which the contravention occurred to do the work to correct the
contravention.
6.11 An order under subsection 6.10 shall set out:
6.11.1 reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
contravention and the location of the Property on which the contravention
occurred; and
6.11.2 the work to be completed which may include but is not limited to requiring
that:
(a) prior to performing any work, all necessary permits or other approvals be
applied for and obtained;
(b) a Cross Connection Survey Form be completed;
(c) a Backflow Prevention Device be installed;
(d) a Backflow Prevention Device be tested;
(e) a Backflow Prevention Device be repaired;
(f) a Backflow Prevention Device be replaced;
(g) a legible Test Report be submitted to the City for approval;
(h) a test tag be applied to a Backflow Prevention Device;
(i) arrangements be made for the shutting off of the supply of water from the
City’s Water Distribution System until the work ordered to be done is
completed; and
9
6.11.3 the date and time by which the work must be completed, which may be of
immediate effect should the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer determine
that the circumstances warrant.
.
6.12 An order to discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection 6.9 or an
order to do work made under subsection 6.11 may be served personally or by
registered mail to the last known address of:
6.12.1the Owner or occupier of the Property where the contravention occurred;
and
6.12.2 such other persons affected by the order as the Municipal Law Enforcement
Officer making the order determines.
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place five business days
after the date of mailing.
6.13 In addition to service given in accordance with subsection 6.12, an order to
discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection 6.9 or an order to do work
made under subsection 6.11 may be served by a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer
placing a placard containing the order in a conspicuous place on the Property where
the contravention occurred.
6.14 Where service cannot be given in accordance with subsection 6.12, sufficient service
is deemed to have taken place when given in accordance with subsection 6.13.
6.15 No person shall remove an order, notice, direction or placard posted on a Property
indicating that it was posted under this By-law, except a Municipal Law Enforcement
Officer.
6.16 Where a time frame is set out in an order for carrying out any action, the Municipal
Law Enforcement Officer may extend the time for compliance beyond the established
time frame provided such extension is required and is acceptable to the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer.
6.17 Where a person does not comply with a direction or a requirement, including an
order, under this By-law to do a matter or thing, the General Manager, with such
assistance by others as may be required, may carry out such direction, requirement
or order at the person’s expense.
6.18 The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection 6.17 by
action or by adding the costs to the tax roll and collecting them in the same manner
as property taxes and such costs shall include an interest rate of 15 percent
commencing on the day the City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs,
including the interest, are paid in full.
6.19 The General Manager is authorized to give immediate effect to any direction, or
requirement where the costs of carrying out the direction or requirement do not
exceed $10,000 and, where the costs do exceed $10,000, as the City’s Council may
authorize.
10
6.20 The amount of the City’s costs including interest to the date payment is made in full,
constitutes a lien upon the land, upon the registration of a notice of lien upon the
land.
6.21 Without limiting the generality of subsections 6.5 to 6.20, where the General
Manager has determined, in his or her sole discretion, that an immediate threat of
contamination in the City’s Water Distribution System exists that can endanger public
health and safety, the General Manager may shut off the water supply to the
Property or any Building or Structure thereon, until the threat of contamination has
been eliminated.
Penalties
6.22 Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is, upon conviction, guilty
of an offence and is liable:
6.22.1 on a first conviction, for each day or part of a day on which the offence occurs
or continues, to a fine of not more than $10,000; and
6.22.2 on any subsequent conviction, for each day or part of a day on which the
offence occurs or continues, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
6.23 Despite subsection 6.22, where the person convicted is a corporation,
6.23.1 the maximum fine in paragraph 6.22.1 is $50,000; and
6.23.2 the maximum fine in paragraph 6.22.2 is $100,000.
6.24 Any person who contravenes an order made under this By-law, or an officer or director
of a corporation who knowingly concurs in such a contravention by the corporation, is
guilty of a continuing offence and upon conviction is liable to a daily fine or penalty of
a maximum of $10,000 for each day or part of a day that the offence continues, and
despite subsections 6.22 and 6.23, the total of all the daily fines imposed for an offence
is not limited by the fine amounts listed in those subsections.
6.25 Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction
has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition
to any other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law, make an order
prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
11
6.26 Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law shall be deemed to be
committing a continuing offence for each day or part of day that the contravention
remains uncorrected.
7.0 PROPERTY SURVEYS
7.1 Subject to subsection 7.3, every Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies
shall, within six months of the date that this By-law comes into force, and within
every five years thereafter:
7.1.1. cause to be carried out a survey of the Owner’s Property and of each of the
Owner’s Buildings and Structures on the Property with respect to all Cross
Connections and all existing and required Backflow Prevention Devices;
7.1.2 ensure that such survey is carried out on a Cross Connection Survey Form
by a person permitted to do so pursuant to the Authorized Functions List; and
7.1.3. ensure that the completed Cross Connection Survey Form and the applicable
fee are received by the City within 14 days of the survey being completed.
7.2 In addition to the obligations set out in subsection 7.1, each time that one or more of
the following events occur, the Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies shall
also comply with the requirements of paragraphs 7.1.1, 7.1.2 and 7.1.3 within 30
days of the date on which such event occurred:
7.2.1 the hazard level of a Building or Structure on the Property has changed;
7.2.2. the ownership of the Property has changed;
7.2.3 the circumstances at the Property or the equipment has changed and such
change either alters or has the potential to alter the information contained in
the most recent Cross Connection Survey Form provided to the City.
7.3 Every Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies and which Property has a
Small Private Service shall, within six months of the date that this By-law comes into
force, and within every five years thereafter:
7.3.1. carry out a survey of the Owner’s Property and of each of the Owner’s
Buildings and Structures on the Property with respect to all Cross
Connections and potential hazards;
7.3.2 ensure that such survey is carried out on a Self-Assessed Survey by the
Owner; and
7.3.3. ensure that the completed Self-Assessed Survey is received by the City
within 14 days of the survey being completed.
7.4 In addition to the obligations set out in subsection 7.3, each time that one or more of
the following events occur, the Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies and
which Property has a Small Private Service shall also comply with the requirements
12
of paragraphs 7.3.1, 7.3.2 and 7.3.3 within 30 days of the date on which such event
occurred:
7.4.1 the hazard level of a Building or Structure on the Property has changed;
7.4.2. the ownership of the Property has changed;
7.4.3 the circumstances at the Property or the equipment has changed and such
change either alters or has the potential to alter the information contained in
the most recent Cross Connection Survey Form provided to the City.
7.5 No person shall submit a Cross Connection Survey Form or a Self-Assessed Survey
to the City that contains inaccurate or false information.
8.0 SELECTION OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
8.1. Every Owner of a Building or Structure located on a Property to which this By-law
applies, shall ensure that every Backflow Prevention Device for Premise Isolation on
his or her Property:
8.1.1 is selected in accordance with the CSA Standard;
8.1.2 is a testable device; and
8.1.3 is installed in accordance with the provisions of the Cross Connection Control
Manual and the CSA Standard.
8.2 In the event of a conflict between the Cross Connection Control Manual and the CSA
Standard, the provisions of the CSA Standard shall prevail.
8.3 Despite subsection 8.1, the General Manager may require that a particular Backflow
Prevention Device be used in respect of any Cross Connection.
9.0 INSTALLATION ETC. OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICES
9.1 Every person who installs, replaces, relocates or repairs a Backflow Prevention Device
required under this By-law shall ensure that:
9.1.1 such device is installed in accordance with acceptable engineering practices, the
requirements of the CSA Standard and the manufacturer’s specifications;
9.1.2 such device is installed in a Building, Structure or underground vault and is
protected from freezing;
9.1.3 where such device is installed in a Building or Structure, the device is installed
in accordance with the conditions of a building permit required to be obtained
from the City for such device in accordance with the Building Code, including
13
the payment of all associated fees and charges;
9.1.4 where such device is installed in an underground vault, the device is installed
in accordance with the conditions of a backflow prevention device installation
permit required to be obtained from the City under this By-law, including the
payment of all associated fees and charges;
9.1.5 such device is located in such a manner so that in the event of Backflow the
device prevents contamination of the Water Distribution System;
9.1.6 where such device is installed for Premise Isolation, such device is located no
more than 3.0 metres downstream of the Water Meter, or in the case of a Fire
Protection System, such device is installed where the Fire Protection System
enters the Building or Structure and in a location acceptable to the General
Manager; and
9.1.6.1 Despite subsection 9.1.6, for all hazard other than High or
Severe Hazard, a Property Owner may apply to the General
Manager to have such device installed where the water service
enters the Building or Structure, and the General Manager may
approve the installation of the device in a location acceptable to
the General Manager, provided the following conditions are
met:
a) A property inspection by the General Manager, which includes a
water shut off, confirms no Cross Connection between the property
line and premise Backflow Prevention Device;
b) The Owner pays all fees and charges associated with the
application, inspection and water shut off; and,
c) The Owner signs an agreement with terms and conditions
acceptable to the General Manager on an annual basis.
9.1.6.2 In the event of failure or refusal to comply with any of the
conditions set out in subsection 9.1.6.1 or the terms and
conditions in the agreement signed pursuant to section
9.1.6.1(c), the Owner shall comply with requirements set out in
section 9.1.6
9.1.7 all piping between the Water Meter and such device is clearly labeled “no
connection permitted” with labelling which is a minimum of 25mm in height,
green in color and which is affixed to the piping no more than 300mm apart, at
every bend and at every change of direction.
9.2 The Owner of a Building or Structure located on a Property to which this By-law applies
shall protect each Backflow Prevention Device from freezing at all times.
9.3 The Owner shall, at all times, maintain a Backflow Prevention Device required under
this By-law in proper working order and otherwise in accordance with this By-law.
14
10.0 TESTING OF DEVICES
10.1 Every person who tests a Backflow Prevention Device required under this By-law
shall carry out such testing in accordance with this By-law and the CSA Standard.
10.2 In addition to the testing methods set out in the CSA Standard, test procedures
established by the ASSE or AWWA for testing Backflow Prevention Devices may be
employed. However, in the event of a conflict between the testing methods set out in
the CSA Standard and the testing procedures established by the ASSE or AWWA, the
testing methods set out in the CSA Standard shall prevail.
10.3 Despite any provision in the CSA Standard to the contrary, every person who tests a
Backflow Prevention Device required under this By-law shall enter the results of such
test on a Test Report.
10.4 Every person who tests a Backflow Prevention Device required under this By-law shall:
10.4.1 within 14 days of completing such test:
(a) provide a legible Test Report to the City in respect of such test; and
(b) pay the applicable fee to the City;
10.4.2 upon completing such test, affix a completed test tag in the form approved by
the General Manager, to the device or immediately adjacent to the device on
the piping connected thereto; and
10.4.3 upon finding that such device is malfunctioning or otherwise not in proper
working order, immediately notify the Owner of the Property and the City of
such condition.
10.5 Every Owner who has a Backflow Prevention Device required under this By-law which
is located on his or her Property shall ensure that;
10.5.1 such device is tested by the appropriate person on the Authorized Functions
List when it is first installed and annually thereafter, or when requested by the
City, and also each time when the device is replaced, relocated or repaired;
10.5.2 within 14 days of completing a test of such device in accordance with
paragraph 10.5.1:
(a) a legible Test Report is provided to the City in respect of such test; and
(b) the applicable fee is paid to the City; and
10.5.3 in the event that such device is malfunctioning or otherwise not in
proper working order, the device is immediately repaired or replaced.
10.6 No person shall submit a Test Report to the City that contains inaccurate or false
information.
15
11.0 REMOVAL OF BACKFLOW PREVENTION DEVICE
11.1 No person shall remove a Backflow Prevention Device required under this By-law, or
any part thereof, after it has been installed, and no Owner of a Property where such
a Backflow Prevention Device is installed shall cause or permit the removal of such a
device, unless such removal is:
11.1.1 to facilitate the repair of the device, with the device replaced
immediately after the repair is carried out;
11.1.2 to replace the device with another one that meets or exceeds the
provisions of this By-law; or
11.1.3 to facilitate the disconnection of the Private Service from the Water
Distribution System in accordance with the written approval of the
General Manager,
or any combination of the foregoing.
11.2 Whenever a Backflow Prevention Device required under this By-law has been
permanently removed or the type of device has been changed, the Owner of the
Property must notify the General Manager in writing immediately of such change.
12.0 AUTHORITY OF THE GENERAL MANAGER
12.1 The General Manager has the authority to:
12.1.1 require an Owner of a Property to which this By-law applies to conduct
additional tests, provide additional reports and undertake any other measures
required for the prevention of Backflow or protection of a Cross Connection;
and
12.1.2 permit exceptions to provisions of this By-law where the General Manager is
satisfied that such an exception does not create an unreasonable risk of
Backflow.
13.0 SHORT TITLE
13.1 This By-law may be referred to as the “Backflow Prevention By-law”.
14.0 EFFECTIVE DATE
14.1 This By-law shall come into force on the date it is passed.
14.2 Despite subsection 14.1, the Owner of a Building or Structure located on a Property to
which this By-law applies and which existed prior to the date referred to in subsection
16
14.1 shall comply with the provisions of subsections 3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 prior to the date
set out below in accordance with the corresponding degree of hazard on the Property:
Degree of Hazard for Compliance Date
Building or Structure Located
on Property
High or Severe Hazard 18 months after the date this By-law
comes into force
All other hazards 24 months after the date this By-law
comes into force, except for a Property
which has a Small Private Service, in
which case compliance with subsections
3.2, 3.3 and 3.4 is not required.
PASSED this 12th day of May, 2010.
____________________________ _____________________________
Fred Eisenberger Rose Caterini
Mayor City Clerk
17
SCHEDULE A
AUTHORIZED FUNCTIONS LIST
Licensed Apprentice
Journeyman
master sprinkler and
sprinkler and
Certified sprinkler and fire
Professional Licensed Journeyman Apprentice fire
engineering fire protection
engineer master plumber plumber protection
Authorized technologist protection installer with
Item with tester's plumber with with tester's with tester's installer with
function with tester's installer with a
certificate tester's certificate** certificate*** a
certificate* a tester's
certificate tester's
tester's certificate
certificate**
certificate ****
Carry out Cross
Connection control
1 survey required YES YES YES YES YES NO NO NO
under this By-law
Install, relocate, or YES YES YES
replace Backflow In regards to In regards to In regards to
2 Prevention Device NO NO YES YES YES a Fire a Fire a Fire
required under Protection Protection Protection
this By-law System only System only System only
Repair Backflow
Prevention Device
3 NO NO YES YES YES NO NO NO
required under
this By-law
Test Backflow
Prevention Device
4 YES YES YES YES YES YES YES YES
required under
this By-law
*Required to be under the direction of a professional engineer.
**Required to be under the direction of a Iicensed master except if working in-house
***Required to be under the direct supervision of a journeyman plumber (in-house) or a licensed master plumber.
****Required to be under the direct supervision of a sprinkler and fire protection installer journeyman (in-house) or a licensed master sprinkler and fire protection installer.
For the purposes of Schedule A: "tester's certificate" means an OWWA Cross Connection Control Specialist Certificate or an ASSE Cross Connection Control/Backflow Certificate or equivalent acceptable
to the General Manager
All test kits used for testing Backflow Prevention Devices require a valid calibration certificate to be submitted to the City of Hamilton annually.
This Authorized Functions List does not include the completion of the Self-Assessed Survey
18
SCHEDULE B
CITY REGISTRATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PERSONS ON AUTHORIZED FUNCTIONS LIST
Person Described on Required to Register with the Required to provide Required to pay the Receives a Registration
Authorized Functions List City? requested documentation to applicable registration fee? Number?
the City?
Professional Engineer with Yes. Required to register self Yes, for both self and all Yes, pay one fee for all Yes, one registration
tester’s certificate and all certified engineering certified engineering persons registered. number for all persons
technologists with a tester’s technologists with a tester’s registered.
certificate who are under certificate who are under
his/her direction. his/her direction.
Licensed master plumber with Yes. Required to register self Yes, for self as well as all Yes, pay one fee for all Yes, one registration
tester’s certificate as well as all journeyman journeyman plumbers with a persons registered. number for all persons
plumbers with a tester’s tester’s certificate and all registered.
certificate and all apprentice apprentice plumbers with a
plumbers with a tester’s tester’s certificate who are
certificate who are under under his/her direction or direct
his/her direction or direct supervision.
supervision.
Licensed master sprinkler and Yes. Required to register self Yes, for self as well as all Yes, pay one fee for all Yes, one registration
fire protection installer with a as well as all journeyman journeyman sprinkler and fire persons registered. number for all persons
tester’s certificate sprinkler and fire protection protection installers with a registered.
installers with a tester’s tester’s certificate and all
certificate and all apprentice apprentice sprinkler and fire
sprinkler and fire protection protection installers with a
installers with a tester’s tester’s certificate who are
certificate who are under under his/her direction or direct
his/her direction or direct supervision.
supervision.
Persons in-house engaged in Yes. Yes. Yes, pay one fee for all Yes, one registration
or occupied in any one of the persons registered. number for all persons
trades governed by this By- Journeyman plumber with For journeyman plumber with a registered.
law as a journeyman or tester’s certificate is required to tester’s certificate and for all
apprentice carrying out in- register self as well as all apprentice plumbers with a
house work for a single apprentice plumbers with a tester’s certificate who are
institution, business or other tester’s certificate who are under his/her direct
organization. under his/her direct supervision.
supervision.
Journeyman sprinkler and fire For journeyman sprinkler and
protection installer with a fire protection installer with a
tester’s certificate is required to tester’s certificate and for all
register self as well as all apprentice sprinkler and fire
19
apprentice sprinkler and fire protection installers with a
protection installers with a tester’s certificate who are
tester’s certificate who are under his/her direct
under his/her direct supervision.
supervision.
20




Content from 10104 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 7, Public Works Committee
Report 10-007 (PW09087(b))
CM: May 12, 2010
Bill No. 104
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-104
To Amend the Waterworks By-law R84-026, as amended
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law R84-026, being a by
law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system of
The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of water
rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C\ every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS on May 12, 2010, the Council of the City of Hamilton did
approve of Item 7 of the Public Works Committee Report 10-007 and did
authorize the amendment contained herein to reflect the City of Hamilton's
Backflow Prevention By-law;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 14(3) of By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
the following substituted therefor
(3) No person shall install, maintain or use any connection with any
part of a water supply system which is or may be connected to a
watermain of the City of Hamilton whereby foreign matter, non-
potable water, or water from a private well may enter the City of
Hamilton water system, unless in accordance with the City of
Hamilton's Backflow Prevention By-law.
2. This by-law shall come into force on the date it is passed.
3. In all other respects, the contents of By-law R84-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 12th day of May, 2010.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor



Content from 10118 yard maintenance bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-118
BEING A BY-LAW TO REGULATE EXTERIOR PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INCLUDING
VEGETATION, WASTE AND GRAFFITI
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-laws listed on the
following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience only and is not the official or legal
version of the By-law. For accurate reference to the By-law, certified copies should be obtained through the City
Clerk’s Office.
CITY OF HAMILTON
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 10-118
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-Law No: Effective Date:
11-230 September 28, 2011 Housekeeping and Technical Amendments.
12-070 March 28, 2012 Amendment to provide for draining of swimming
pools, hot tubs, spas, water features, or similar water
containers.
12-140 June 27, 2012 Addition of new definition – Boulevard.
19-100 May 9, 2019 Tree Requirements
Update definitions for inoperative vehicle and urban
19-173 July 12, 2019
boundary
Page 2 of 12
Revised July, 2019
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10- 118
YARD MAINTENANCE BY-LAW
Being a by-law to regulate exterior property maintenance including vegetation, waste and
graffiti and to repeal By-law No. 03-118.
WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-
laws necessary or desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 5, 6 and 8 of
subsection 10(2) authorize by-laws respecting the economic, social and environmental well-being of
the municipality; the health, safety and well-being of persons; and the protection of persons and
property;
AND WHEREAS section 127 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to require the
owner or occupant of land to clean and clear the land, not including buildings, and to clear refuse or
debris from the land, not including buildings;
AND WHEREAS section 127 of the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton to
prohibit the depositing of refuse or debris on land without the consent of the owner or occupant of the
land;
AND WHEREAS section 128 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to prohibit
and regulate with respect to public nuisances, including matters that, in the opinion of the City of
Hamilton’s Council, are or could become or cause public nuisances;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to pass by-
laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of Hamilton passed under that Act
is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton, amongst other
things, to delegate its authority, to impose fees or charges on persons for services or activities
provided or done by or on behalf of it, to provide for inspections and inspection orders, and to make
orders to discontinue activity or to do work;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
SHORT TITLE
1. This By-law may be referred to as the “Yard Maintenance By-law” or the “Hamilton Yard
Maintenance By-law”.
Page 3 of 12
Revised July, 2019
DEFINITIONS
2(1) In this By-law:
(12-140) “boulevard” means that portion of the road allowance which is not used as travelled roadway
or shoulder;
“City” means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic area of the City of Hamilton
as the context requires;
(19-100) “Director” means the City’s Director of Licensing and By-law Services and their designate or
successor;
“farm” means an agricultural operation as defined in the Farming and Food Production Protection
Act, 1998 and includes such an operation that is not carried on with the expectation of gain but
otherwise meets the definition in that Act;
“graffiti” means any words, figures, letters, numbers or drawings sprayed, scribbled, scratched,
etched or otherwise applied on a surface;
“inoperative machinery” includes but is not limited to machinery that is unable to be operated as a
result of being dismantled, broken or incomplete, decayed or dilapidated;
(19-173) “inoperative vehicle” means a vehicle and a motorized snow vehicle, as those terms are
defined in the Highway Traffic Act, that may not be lawfully operated on a highway for any of the
following reasons:
(i) it has missing, broken, incomplete, decayed, or damaged parts or components;
or
(ii) it is in a derelict condition;
“normal farm practices” means normal farm practices as defined in the Farming and Food
Production Protection Act, 1998;
“noxious weed” means a noxious weed designated under the Weed Control Act including any weed
designated as a local or noxious weed under a by-law of the City passed under that Act;
“occupant” means a person over the age of 18 in possession of a property;
(19-100) “officer” means a person appointed by the City of Hamilton or assigned by the Director to
enforce this By-law;
“ornamental plant” means a plant deliberately grown for beautification, screening, accent, specimen,
colour or other aesthetic reasons but does not include any variety of turf grass;
“owner” includes each owner and occupant of a property;
“property” means land including a building or structure, or part of a building or structure;
Page 4 of 12
Revised July, 2019
(19-173) “urban boundary” means the urban boundary as defined in the City’s Urban Official Plan and
the settlement area boundaries of the Rural Settlement Areas of the City as defined in the City’s Rural
Official Plan;
“waste” means a substance or material that is unusable or unwanted and includes but is not limited
to:
(i) animal feces;
(ii) broken or discarded material;
(iii) disconnected appliances and parts of such appliances;
(iv) firewood not stacked neatly;
(v) indoor furniture;
(vi) inoperative machinery, inoperative vehicles, parts of such machinery not packaged for
immediate shipment or parts of vehicles not packaged for immediate shipment;
(vii) material resulting from construction, demolition, repair or renovation projects,
(viii) piping, ducting, tubing, conduits, cable, wire and fittings or related accessories not
packaged for immediate shipment;
(ix) torn or cut twigs or branches;
(x) waste lumber,
and does not include waste that is contained, in compliance with all applicable laws and by-
laws, in a salvage yard with a current and valid licence under the City’s Licensing By-law;
“watercourse” means an identifiable depression in the ground in which a natural flow of water
occasionally, regularly or continuously occurs, but does not include a swale shaped or graded in earth
materials and stabilized with site suitable vegetation for the conveyance of storm water runoff; and
“yard” means the land within the boundary lines of a property not occupied by a principal building, if
any, and includes grounds or vacant property.
VEGETATION
3(1)(a) Every owner or occupant of property shall keep vegetation in the yard of their property
clean and cleared up.
(b) Paragraph (a) does not apply to:
(i) crops being grown on a farm; or
(ii) a property located outside the urban boundary.
(c) For the purposes of paragraph (a), to “clean” or “clear up” means:
(i) for property located inside the urban boundary that is equal to or less than 0.4 ha in
area, to keep all plants cut to a height of equal to or less than 21 cm, except:
Page 5 of 12
Revised July, 2019
1. ornamental plants;
2. shrubs or trees;
3. cultivated fruits or vegetables; or
4. plants buffering or otherwise protecting a natural feature such as a watercourse;
(ii) for property located inside the urban boundary that is greater than 0.4 ha in area, to
keep all plants with 10 m of any property line cut to a height of equal to or less than
21 cm, except:
1. ornamental plants;
2. shrubs or trees;
3. cultivated fruits or vegetables; or
4. plants buffering or otherwise protecting a natural feature such as a watercourse;
(iii) to remove all noxious weeds and, in the case of poison ivy, to treat the poison ivy
with an herbicide that causes it to be destroyed or which prevents the growth of the
poison ivy or the ripening of its seeds, provided that nothing in this subparagraph
authorizes the use of any herbicide contrary to any other law in force in Ontario; and
(iv) to maintain the yard so as to prevent instability including but not limited to the
erosion of the soil.
3(2) (19-100) Every owner or occupant of property located within the urban boundary, shall keep trees
in the yard of their property free from dead, decayed or damaged limbs or branches.
WASTE
4(1) Every owner or occupant of property shall keep the yard of their property free and clear of all
waste.
4(1.1) (12-140) Every owner or occupant of property shall keep the boulevard adjacent to their property
free and clear of all waste.
4(2) No person shall use the yard of any property within the City for depositing of any waste.
4(3) Subject to subsection 4(4), subsections 4(1) and 4(2) do not apply to:
(a) property used by the City for the purpose of depositing waste; or
(b) property used for the purpose of depositing waste under federal, provincial or municipal
authority.
4(4) No person other than the City or a person with prior federal, provincial or municipal authority
shall deposit waste on property described in subsection 4(3).
Page 6 of 12
Revised July, 2019
4(5) Every owner or occupant of property shall ensure that all waste which accumulates on their
property is:
(a) when not placed out for collection in accordance with applicable City by-laws, in
containers:
(i) made of rigid, watertight construction;
(ii) provided with a tight-fitting cover, which may be removed only when the container
is empty or is being actively loaded;
(iii) maintained in good condition without holes or spillage; and
(iv) closed, or emptied, rinsed and cleaned when not in use, to prevent the escape of
offensive odour or waste; and
(v) kept in a rear yard located against a building, structure, fence or retaining wall and
arranged in an orderly manner; and
(b) not allowed to accumulate for longer than 10 days.
4(6) Every owner or occupant of a property where an exterior bulk or roll-off container disposal
system is used shall ensure the containers are:
(a) equipped with covers or similar devices which shall be readily operable but not left open
except when actively being loaded;
(b) large enough to contain all waste generated between collections by the occupants served;
and
(c) not loaded beyond the top of the container.
4(7) Every owner or occupant of a property shall:
(a) have not more than 2 compost heaps on their property; and
(b) ensure that each compost heap:
(i) has a maximum size of 1 m3;
(ii) is located a minimum of 1 m from any property line; and
(iii) is enclosed on all sides by concrete blocks, a lumber structure, a metal frame, or a
commercial plastic compost container.
4(8) For the purposes of section 4, “yard” includes but is not limited to an exterior porch or similar
erection.
Page 7 of 12
Revised July, 2019
GRAFITTI
5(1) Every owner or occupant of property shall clean the exterior of any building, structure, erection
or object on their property of graffiti, except any graffiti applied with the prior written authority of
the owner or occupant of the property.
5(2) For the purposes of section 5, “building, structure, erection or object” includes but is not limited
to a fence, retaining wall, paved or similarly finished surface, vehicle, trailer or waste container.
LITTER
6(1) No person shall deposit waste on property without the prior written authority of the owner or
occupant of the property.
6(2) No person shall deposit waste on property owned or occupied by the City or a local board of
the City without the written authority of the City or the local board, or, where such property is
occupied by a person other than the City or the local board, without the written authority of the
occupant.
6(3) A person does not breach subsections 6(1) or 6(2) merely by placing waste out for collection
on their property in accordance with applicable City by-laws, but no person shall leave out
waste contrary to such City by-laws.
DRAINS
7(1) Every owner or occupant of property on which there is a private drain shall keep their drain
operational and in repair.
7(2) No owner or occupant of property shall obstruct or permit the obstruction of a private drain on
their property, provided only that the subsequent connection of their property’s private sewage
system to the City’s sanitary sewer in a manner approved by the City shall be permitted as a
replacement to a private sanitary drain.
7(3) No owner or occupant of property shall obstruct, or cause or permit the obstruction of a
watercourse on their property.
7.1 (12-070) Every owner or occupant of property shall ensure that water from a swimming pool, hot
tub, spa, water feature, rain barrel or similar water container is not drained:
(a) on to an adjacent property;
(b) into a sanitary sewer, a storm sewer or a combined sewer unless the Sewer Use By-law
is complied with.
FARMS
8(1) Despite section 4, a farm may keep inoperative agricultural machinery and inoperative
agricultural vehicles in a yard provided that the inoperative agricultural machinery or
inoperative agricultural vehicles are placed or arranged so as not to create a safety or health
Page 8 of 12
Revised July, 2019
hazard to persons on the property, and in particular so as not to block emergency access to or
from the property, and:
(a) the inoperative agricultural machinery or inoperative agricultural vehicles are kept in an
area screened from view from outside the property lines by a fence, wall or other solid
structure including a hedge at least 2 m high that complies with all other applicable by-
laws or laws;
(b) the inoperative agricultural machinery or inoperative agricultural vehicles are set back
from the property lines by at least 100 m; or
(c) the inoperative agricultural machinery or inoperative agricultural vehicles are temporarily
not in use in accordance with normal farm practices.
HEALTH AND SAFETY
9(1) Every owner or occupant of property shall ensure that any well, cistern, cesspool, privy vault,
pit or excavation:
(a) in active use, is secured by a fence with a warning signs;
(b) not in active use, is permanently sealed or secured by a fence, cover or other means.
9(2) Every owner or occupant of property shall keep the surfaces of steps, walks, driveways, parking
spaces and similar areas of their property maintained so as to afford safe passage under their
normal use.
9(3) Every owner or occupant of property shall keep the yard of their property clean and free from
any objects or conditions that might create a health, fire or accident hazard or an unsafe
condition.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10(1) (19-100) The Director is assigned the responsibility of administering or enforcing this By-law and
may so assign duties to such persons as necessary to carry out the provisions of this By-law.
10(2) Persons appointed or assigned for the purposes of administering or enforcing this By-law are
officers, have the authority to carry out the duties assigned to officers under this By-law, and
may enforce the provisions of this By-law.
10(3) An officer may enter on property at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an
inspection to determine whether or not the following are being complied with:
(a) this By-law;
(b) a direction or order made under this By-law; or
Page 9 of 12
Revised July, 2019
(c) a prohibition order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
10(4). An officer may, for the purposes of the inspection under subsection 10(3):
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the inspection;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the purpose of
making copies or extracts;
(c) require information in writing or otherwise as required by the officer from any person
concerning a matter related to the inspection; or
(d) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert knowledge, make
examinations or take tests, samples or photographs necessary for the purposes of the
inspection.
10(5) Any cost incurred by the City in exercising its authority to inspect under paragraph 10(4)(d),
including but not limited to the cost of any examination, test, sample or photograph necessary
for the purposes of the inspection, shall be paid by the owner or occupant of the property
where the inspection takes place.
10(6) An officer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an order issued by a provincial judge or
justice of the peace under Section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001 where he or she has been
prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying out an inspection under subsections 10(3)
and 10(4).
10(7) If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may make
an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or permitted the
contravention or the owner or occupant of the property on which the contravention occurred to
discontinue the contravening activity.
10(8) An order under subsection 10(7) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention and
the location of the property on which the contravention occurred; and
(b) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
10(9) If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may make
an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or permitted the
contravention or the owner or occupant of the property on which the contravention occurred to
do work to correct the contravention.
10(10) An order under subsection 10(9) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention and
the location of property on which the contravention occurred;
Page 10 of 12
Revised July, 2019
(b) the work to be completed; and
(c) the date or dates by which the work must be complete.
10(11) An order to discontinue contravening activity made under subsection 10(7) or an order to do
work made under subsection 10(9) may be served:
(a) by regular mail to the last known address of the owner or occupant of the property
where the contravention occurred;
(b) by an officer placing a placard containing the order in a conspicuous place on the
property where the contravention occurred; or
(c) personally on the owner or occupant of the property where the contravention occurred.
10(12) Where a person does not comply with a direction, an order or a requirement under this By-
law to do a matter or thing, the Director, with such assistance by others as may be required,
may carry out such direction, order or requirement at the person’s expense.
10(13) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection 10(12) by action
or by adding the costs to the tax roll and collecting them in the same manner as property
taxes and such costs shall include an interest rate of 15 per cent per year commencing on
the day the City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs, including the interest, are
paid in full.
10(14) The Director is authorized to give immediate effect to any direction or requirement where the
costs of carrying out the direction or requirement do not exceed $10,000 and, where the
costs do exceed $10,000, as the City’s Council may authorize.
10(15) Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law or fails to comply with an order
made under this By-law is guilty of an offence and upon conviction is liable:
(a) on a first conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000; and
(b) on any subsequent conviction, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
10(16) Despite subsection 10(15), where the person convicted is a corporation:
(a) the maximum fine in paragraph 10(15)(a) is $50,000; and
(b) the maximum fine in paragraph 10(15)(b) is $100,000.
10(17) Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction has been
entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition to any other
remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law, make an order prohibiting the
continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
Page 11 of 12
Revised July, 2019
TRANSITION, REPEAL, COMING INTO FORCE, ETC.
11(1) All measurements in this By-law are given the metric short form.
11(2) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this By-law invalid,
it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to be in force.
11(3) All prosecutions and other enforcement processes commenced under By-law No. 03-118
which have not been completed on the day this By-law comes into force shall be completed
under By-law No. 03-118 as if it had not be repealed.
11(4) By-law No. 03-118 is repealed as of the day this By-law comes into force.
11(5) This By-law comes into force on the date of its passing.
PASSED this 12th day of July, 2019
__________________________ ____________________________
Fred Eisenberger J. Pilon
Mayor Acting City Clerk
Page 12 of 12
Revised July, 2019



Content from 10121 to amend bylaw no 03020 to regulate noise in the city of hamiltonpdf:
Authority: Item 1, Economic Development
and Planning Committee Report:
10-06 ((PED09303(a))
CM: March 29, 2010
Bill No. 121
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-121
A By-Law amending By-law No. 03-020 to regulate Noise
WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton wishes to amend By-law No. 03-
020 to regulate noise;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection l(3) of By-law No. 03-020 is amended by adding the
following new paragraph before paragraph (a):
(a.1) Agricultural Area means an area in the City zoned as
agricultural or rural or both;
2. Subsection l(3) of By-law No. 03-020 is further amended by adding
the following new paragraph before paragraph (i):
(i.1) farm means an agricultural operation as defined in the
Farminq and Food Protection Act, 1998 and includes such
an operation that is not carried on with the expectation of
gain but otherwise meets the definition in that Act;
3. Section 4 of By-law No. 03-020 is amended by adding the words "or in
Agricultural Areas (at any time)'' after "in Residential Areas (at any
time)".
4. Section 4 of By-law No. 03-020 is further amended by adding the
words "not including, when the Point of Reception is in an
Agricultural Area, a sound from dog kept or harboured on a farm.
Mayor



Content from 10128 omb file no pl100633  to amend bylaw no 05200pdf:
ISSUE DATE:
im. 28, 2011
PL100633
10-128-OMB-01 .
Attachments 1,2,3, & 4 Ontario Municipal Board
Commission des affaires municipales de I Ontario
2243361 Ontario Inc. has appealed to the Ontario Municipal Board under subsection 17(24) of
the Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.13, as amended, from a decision of the City of-Hamilton (to
approve or to refuse appro al of) Proposed Amendment No. 223 to the former City of Hamilton
Official Plan
Approval Authority File No. CI-09-H
OMB File No. PL100633
Wayne Clayton has appealed to the Ontario unicipal Board under subsection 17(24) of the
Planning Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.13, as amended, from a decision of the City of Hamilton to
(approve or to refuse approval of) Proposed Amendment No. 158 to the former City of Stoney
Creek Official Plan
Approval Authority File No. CI-09-H
OMB File No. PL100633
2243361 Ontario inc., 5A Developments Inc. and others have appealed to the Ontario Municipal
Board under subsection 34(19) of the P/ann/ngAcf, R.S.O. 1990, c. P.13, as amen ed, against
Zoning By-law 10-128 of the City of Hamilton
OMB File No. PL100634
APPEARANCES:
Parties Counser/Agent
City of Hamilton ichal Minkowski*
5A Developments Inc. Vanessa Bacher*
1823474 Ontario Inc. Sean Gosnell*
T. D. L. Group Victor Labreche
Wayne Clayton
DECISION DELIVERED BY J. E. SNIEZEK AND ORDER OF THE BOARD
Introduction
The City of Hamilton passed By-law 10-128 that represents a "New Industrial
Zoning By-law that regulates uses and sets development standards. Following a pre-
hearing conference, appeals by 1201076 Ontario Li ited, Bunge Canada Holdings Inc.
PL100633
-2-
Flamborough Power Centres Inc., Shawcor Ltd., 2243321 Ontario Limited and Sam s
Auto Wrecking Co. Ltd. were settled. The appeal by ZBX Hamilton Lands Inc. was
ithdrawn May 19th, 2011.
The outstanding appeals are set out below:
• 5A Developments Inc.
• 1823474 Ontario Inc.
• T. D. L. Group
• Wayne Clayton
The Board has received a letter from Horst Felber with respect to property at 68
Trinity Church Road.
The Board heard testimony from Allan Fletcher a qualified professional planner
with the City of Hamilton who has previously been recognized by the Board as an expert
witness. Mr. Fletcher is the Manager of Strategic Projects and the planner responsible
for the New Industrial Zoning By-law.
Review of the evidence
Mr. Fletcher provided an overview of the New Industrial Zoning By-law including
the following elements: •
• Hamilton Bay Front - a heavy industrial area - former Dofasco and Stelco
with a mix of heavy industrial uses with pockets of residential housing -
also includes light manufacturing as' a buffer surrounding the heavy
industrial area
• Flamborough - a prestige industrial area
• Red Hill Business Park
• The Airport Industrial Area - not included in the new by-law
Ancaster Business Park
PL100633
-3-
• Stoney Creek - QEW - prestige and light industrial area
• West Hamilton Innovation District
• Remnant parcels in Dundas
• Remnant parcels in Hamilton Mountain
• Parcels south of the innovation district
Mr. Fletcher indicated that the number of industrial zones in the communities that
were amalgamated had been reduced from 24 industrial zones to 5.
Mr. Fletcher spoke to Mr. Clayton who owns a house on cNally Road that is an
enclave of residential uses in the former Municipality of Stoney Creek. The Stoney
Creek Business Park surrounds the residential uses along McNally Road. The industrial
area boundary to the south is Barton Street. Mr. Fletcher stated that the proposed
zoning restrictions contained in Section 440 prohibit loading spaces along the building
face abutting the residential area, increase the minimum rear yard to 9 metres, provide
for no manufacturing uses within 28 metres and require a buffer along the
industrial/residential interface with a, berm (1.8 metres) and wall combination (3 metres).
The zone also includes a clarification of the rear yard setback of 24 metres and outdoor
display area limitations of 25%. The details of the by-law are contained in Exhibit 5, Tab
5 and 6. The settlement represents good planning and conforms to the Official Plan.
As a result of the settlement, the appeal of Official Plan Amendment is now dismissed.
Mr. Clayton confirmed that he was in agreement with the settlement and the new
> . ¦
zoning restrictions.
Mr. Fletcher indicated that the TDL Group owns property in an industrial zone in
the Stoney Creek Business Park. The property fronts on the South Service Road and
the settlement will permit a restaurant of 280m2 not exceeding 30% of the building. The
proposed by-law prohibits restaurants along Fruitland Road.
The second part of the amendment concerns the permission of a restaurant at
the intersection of Highways 5 and 6. This is necessary because of the reconstruction of
this intersection.
PL100633
-4-
Mr. Fletcher opined that the provisions of the revised by-law contained in Exhibit
8 represent goo planning" and conform to the Official Plan.
Mr. Labreche indicated that the proposed by-law amendment reflects the
settlement discussions.
Mr. Fletcher indicated that 1823474 Ontario Inc. owns property located at 620
South Service Road. A motor vehicle service station is a permitted use. 1823474
Ontario Inc. wants to develop a gas bar, store, take-out restaurant with drive thru and a
single bay car wash (which is not permitted). The exception 439 permits the addition of
the car wash use and confirms that the interpretation of the Motor Vehicle Service
Station11 permits the convenience store and the accessory use permits the restaurant
use with the drive thru. This was contained in a letter dated May 30,. 2011 from Mr.
Fletcher and is now known as Exhibit 10. Mr. Fletcher.confirmed his written comment in
his oral testimony before the Board.
Mr. Fletcher concluded that the zoning amendment contained in Exhibit 9 and the
Letter of May 30, 2011 (Exhibit 10) represented "good planning and conformed to the
Official Plan.
r. Gosnell agreed with the submissions of the City and asked the Board to
affirm the interpretation letter in its decision.
5A Developments owns an eight acre property across Fruitland Road at 650
South Service Road that is zoned M3. The subject lands are in the Stoney Creek
Industrial Business Park. The proposed settlement adds a range of support uses to the
M4 zone and four uses to the 3 zone - restaurant, financial establishment, retail and
personal services. The restaurant use is not limited in size, a drive thru is not permitted,
no restaurant shall be located within 40 metres of Fruitland Road, retail establishments
are restricted to a maximum size of 500 square metres and retail and personal services
floor area is limited to 15% of the gross floor area.
r. Fletcher opined that the settlement reflects good planning practise and
conforms to the planning policy framework and that Exhibit #11 reflects the settlement
discussions.
PL100633
-5-
The City made submissions to the Board with respect to the previous Order the
proposed amendments are contained in Exhibit 12B.
Findings
Based upon the submissions of the Parties and the uncontested evidence of Mr.
Fletcher the Board allows the appeals in part and amends the Board previous decision
in accordance with Exhibit 12B (Attachment 5). The Zoning By-law is amended in
accordance with Exhibits 7, 8, 9, and 11 and attached as Attachments 1, 2, 3 and 4 to
this Order.
THE BOARD ORDERS th t the appeals against By-law 10-128 of the City of
Hamilton are allowed in part, and the Board directs the municipality to amend By-law 10
-128 set out in Attachments 1,2, 3, and 4 to this order. In all other respects, the Board
Orders the appeal are dismissed.
AND THE BOARD ORDERS that the Decision of the Board issued March 25,
2011 is amended in accordance with Attachment 5 .
AND THE BOARD ORDERS that the appeal of Official Plan Amendment 158 is
dismissed.
Joseph E. Sniezek
JOSEPH E. SNIEZEK
MEMBER
PL100633
ATTACHMENT 1
Exhibit #7
PL100633
Page 1 of 2
WAYNE CLAYTON
MINUTES OF SETTLE ENT - BY-LAW CHANGES
That based on the Minutes of Settlement and Council Resolution, By-law 10-128 be
amended as follows:
1. That Schedule C to By-law 10-128 be amended to add the following Special
Exception:
440. In addition to Section 5.2.1, 9.3.3 c), 9.3.3 e), 9.3.3 k) for those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1256,
1257, 1309 and 1310 of Schedule A - Zoning aps, and described as
1047-1049 Barton Street, the following special provisions shall also
apply:
a. In addition to Section 5.2.1, he following shall, also apply:
i) Loading Spaces shall not be per itted on any west
elevation of a building on 1047-1049 Barton Street that
faces the eastern lot line of 1023 Barton Street, 320, 324,
328, 332, 336, 340 and 344 McNeilly Road, except where
separated by another building; and,
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, should a loading space be located
within 40.0 metres of the eastern lot line of 1023 Barton
Street, 320, 324, 328, 332, 336, 340 and 344 McNeilly
Road, the following shall apply:
1. The loading space shall be limited to a maximum
length of 10.0 metres; and,
. 2. Shall be screened from the above noted property line
by a noise attenuation wall attached to the building
equal in length to the loading space.
b In addition to Section 9.3.3 the following shall also apply:
i) Minimum Yard abutting any portion of a property line of the
properties known as 1023 Barton Street, 320, 324, 328,
332, 336, 340 and 344 McNeilly Road shall be 9.0 metres
within which no parking shall be located.
c. In addition to Section 9.3.3 e) the following shall also apply:
PL100633
ATTACHMENT 1
Exhibit #7
PL100633
Page 2 of 2
i) No portion of a building or structure abutting any portion of a
propert lot line of the properties known as 1023 Barton
Street, 320, 324, 328, 332, 336, 340 and 344 McNeilly Road
shall used for Manufacturing within a setback of 28.0
metres.
. Notwithstanding Section 4.19 and 9.3.3 j) a minimum 1.8 metre to
a maximum 3.0 metre berm and solid wall or fence shall be
provided ithin 9.0 metres of the eastern lot line of 1023 Barton
Street, 320, 324, 328, 332, 336, 340 and 344 McNeilly Road.
2. That Section 9.3.31) ii) of By-law 10-128 be deleted in its entirety and replaced
with the following:
ii) In addition to i) above, the area devoted to Outdoor Display shall be
limited to a combined maximum of 25% the Landscaped Area required by
Section 9.3.3 i) i) above.
3. That Section 9.3.3 k) v) of By-law 10-128 be renamed as 9.3.3 k) vi) and that the
following be added to Section 9.3.3 k):
v) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly shall be setback a minimum of
24.0 metres for any portion of a property lot line of the properties known
as 1023 Barton Street, 320, 324, 328, 332, 336, 340 an 344 cNeilly
Road.
PL100633
ATTACHMENT 2
WITHOUT PREJUDICE
Proposed Amendments:
1. That Section 9.3.1 of By-law 10-128 be amended to add "Restaurant" as a
permitted use.
2. That Section 9.3.3 of By-law 10-128 be amend to add the following sub¬
section:
r) Restaurant i) Restaurants shall only be permitted in the
Requirements following locations:
a) on South Service Road located
between Lake Avenue and Winona'
Road, but shall not be located on
any property with frontage on
Fruitland Road;
b) on Barton Street located between
Lake Avenue and Winona Road, but
shall not be located on any property
with frontage on Fruitland Road;
and,
c) The north side of Highway #5, west
of Highway # 6.
d) . Regulations a), b) and c) above shall
not apply to restaurants accessory
to a use on the property.
ii) Maxi um gross floor area for a restaurant,
as permitted in a) and b) above, whether
freestanding or within a multi-tenant
building shall be limited to 280 square
metres.
iii) Where a restaurant is located on a property
with frontage on South Service Road, the
following shall also apply:
a) No restaurant shall occupy more
than 30% of the total gross floor
area on a property,"
PL100633
ATTACHMENT 3
Exhibit #9
PL100633
Page 1 of 1
WITHOUT PREJUDICE
Proposed Amendment:
1. That Schedule C to By-law 10-128 be amended to add the following Special
Exception as follows:
439. In addition to Section 9.3.1, on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park
(M3) Zone, i ent fied on Maps 1149 and 1200 of Schedule A - Zoning
Maps and described as 620 South Service Road, a stand-alone carwash,
accessory to a otor Vehicle Service Station, shall also be permitted.
PL100633
ATTACHMENT 4
WITHOUT PREJUDICE
Proposed Amendment:
1. That Special Exception 399 of Schedule C to By-law 10-128 be amended
as follows:
"399. In addition to Section 9.3.1 and Section 9.3.3, on those lands zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1149 and
1200 of Schedule A" - Zoning Maps and described as 650 South
Service Road, the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. That the following uses shall also be per itted:
i) Restaurant
ii) Financial Establ shment
iii) Retail
iv) Personal Services
b. That the follo ing regulations shall also apply:
i) Notwithstanding any other regulation within this by-law,
a restaurant shall not be limited in size;
ii) No drive through facility shall be permitted even as an
accessory use;
iii) No Restaurant shall be located within 40 m of Fruitland
Road; and
iv) An individual Retail Establishment shall be restricted to
a maxi u gross floor area of 500 square metres.
v) Notwithstanding any other regulation within this by-law,
the maximum gross floor area related to Retail and
Personal Services shall be limited to 15% of the total
gross floor area.
PL100633
ATTACHMENT 5
PL100633
The Decision dated March 25, 2011 as amended by the Decisio dated April
12,2011, is further amended as follows:
. On Page 5, paragraph 6 of the March 25,2011 Decision, the words allowed
i part are deleted and the following substituted therefor: “dismissed and
Official Plan Amendment 233 (former City of Hamilton) is in full force and
effect .
On Page 5, paragraph 7 of the March 25,2011 Decision, the following
words be added at the conclusion of the paragraph: “in accordance with
Exhibit 2, Tab 9 filed.” ¦ p ft*. CfrxksS f b-
Qa ? j | 1 -
Note:
Substitution pages to be provided by City to Board in respect of p. 386 and
p. 387 found in Exhibit 2, Tab 9.



Content from 10128 to amend bylaw 05200 to create new lndustrial zones for the city of hamiltonpdf:
Authority: Item 1, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 10-009 (PED09260a)
CM: May 12,2010
Bill No. 128
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-12 8
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply
to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of By-law 05-200;
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively
deal with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By-law is being enacted
and is coming into force and effect in several stages;
AND WHEREAS, the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law 05-200,
came into force on May 25, 2005;
AND WHEREAS this By-law represents the fourth stage of the Zoning By-law to
create new Industrials Zones, amending certain provisions of By-law 05-200 and,
applying to the lndustrial lands within the Urban Area of the City, as hereinafter
described and depicted;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended
as follows:
a) That Section 2.1 d) - Industrial Classification is amended by adding
the letter "s" to the word "Zone" in the heading;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 2 of 83
That Section 2.1 d) - lndustrial Classification is amended by adding
the following Zones and Zone Symbols following the words
"Research and Development Zone, MI" :
"General Business Park Zone
Prestige Business Park Zone
Business Park Support Zone
General lndustrial Zone
Light lndustrial Zone
2. That SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended as
follows:
a) That the following new definitions be added:
"Building and Lumber Supply Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for a retail store
predominantly selling a combination of
lumber and a wide range of building and
home decorating supplies along with
ancillary sales of construction tools,
gardening products, and home design
products.
Building or Contracting Supply Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, in which
building, construction or home
improvement materials are warehoused
and which may include accessory retail.
Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the bulk
storage or wholesale distribution of
gasoline, oil, petroleum products or other
flammable liquids, but shall not include a
Motor Vehicle Service Station or a Motor
Vehicle Gas Bar.
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental and Service
Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 3 of 83
commercial motor vehicles or parts for
such vehicles are stored and displayed
for the purpose of sale, lease, rental or
repair.
Contractor's Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building,
structure, or part thereof, by a contractor,
for the storage and maintenance of
equipment used by the contractor, but
shall not include a Salvage Yard.
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental and Service
Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display,
sale, lease, rental or repair of
commercial, industrial, farm or
.
agricultural equipment and machinery
and which may include facilities for the
storage and sale of parts accessory to
such equipment and machinery, together
with the repair, painting and service of
such equipment and machinery.
Farm Product Supply Dealer
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sale
and/or storage of seeds, fertilizers, farm
equipment or other goods or materials
used in agriculture.
Hazardous Waste Management Facility
Shall mean a Waste Transfer Facility, a
Waste Processing Facility or a Waste
Disposal Facility that handles Hazardous
Waste and for which a Certificate of
Approval for such purpose under Part V
of the Environmental Protection Act is
required. A Hazardous Waste
Management Facility may also include
the storage, transfer or processing of
non-hazardous waste.
Hazardous Waste Shall mean materials that are defined as
Hazardous Waste under Ontario
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 4 of 83
Regulation 347 to the Environmental
Protection Act.
Home Furnishings Retail Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sale or
rental of home furnishings and related
supplies, materials or fixtures.
Industrial Administrative Office
Shall mean an office for the management
or administration of Manufacturing
establishments.
Labour Association Hall
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, as a meeting
place by labour or trade unions and
which is operated for the exclusive use of
members and their guests and is not
open to the general public on an equal
basis, and which may include but not be
limited to administrative offices, training
facilities and meeting rooms. A Labour
Association Hall may also include a
Trade School.
Landscape Contracting Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where soil,
mulch, rock, screening and other similar
landscape materials are stored and
offered for sale on a wholesale basis,
and which may include but not be limited
to the storage of related equipment.
Accessory snow removal equipment and
storage shall also be permitted.
Major Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display
and retail sale of travel trailers,
recreational vehicles and boats and
which may include but not be limited to
the servicing, repair, cleaning, painting,
polishing and greasing of such vehicles,
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 5 of 83
trailers and boats and the sale of
accessories and related products and the
leasing or renting of such vehicles, but
shall not include a Motor Vehicle Sales
and Service Establishment.
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the repair of
damage to a motor vehicle caused by
collision, accident, corrosion or age, and
which may also include the
reconstruction of motor vehicles, the
painting or repainting of motor vehicles,
the rebuilding or conversion of
automotive engines or engine parts and
which may also include an accessory
Towing Establishment, but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Gas Bar, Motor
Vehicle Service Station, Motor Vehicle
Washing Establishment or Motor Vehicle
Wrecking Establishment.
Motor Vehicle Stacking Space
Shall mean an area devoted to the
waiting or queuing of motor vehicles
accessing a drive through facility,
separate from any aisle providing access
to and from any parking area.
Motor Vehicle Wrecking Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the storage,
dismantling, crushing or demolition of
unlicensed, inoperable or derelict Motor
Vehicles or Commercial Motor Vehicles
and which may include the storage and
sale of salvaged material or parts
obtained therefrom, but shall not include
a Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment, Motor Vehicle Service
Station, Motor Vehicle Washing
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 6 of 83
Private Power Generation Facility
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the
generation and transmission of heat,
steam or electricity, and which may
include the sale of electricity back into
the grid, but shall not include a Waste
Management Facility.
Salvage Yard Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for storing,
wrecking, dismantling, processing,
recycling and selling used goods, wares,
materials and which may include, but not
be limited to household items, clothing,
furniture, paper, bottles, building
materials, scrap metal, machinery, heavy
equipment or parts thereof, and shall
include but not be limited to a Motor
Vehicle Wrecking Establishment. A
Salvage Yard shall not include a Waste
Management Facility.
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or Design Business
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof in which
professionals in the field of surveying,
engineering, planning or design provide
technical consultation, analysis, advisory
or administrative services.
Thermal Treatment Shall mean the processing of Waste into
a waste-based fuel and/or the disposal of
Waste under controlled conditions by
heating or combusting the materials and
shall include refuse derived fuel
manufacturing and energy from waste
activities.
Towing Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the keeping
of tow trucks, and to which disabled or
impounded motor vehicles or mobile
equipment are taken or towed and stored
temporarily until reclaimed, but shall not
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 7 of 83
include a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
Trade School Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, in which
specialized instruction in a skilled trade is
provided and which may include but not
be limited to construction, industrial and
motive power trades and Commercial
Motor Vehicle training and which is
operated on a financial profit basis, but
shall not include a Commercial School or
an Educational Establishment.
Transport Terminal Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where
Commercial Motor Vehicles, trucks,
trailers, rail cars or containers are
loaded, unloaded, temporarily stored,
dispatched or parked for remuneration
and may include freight handling facilities
related to the trans-shipment of goods,
materials or products.
Travel Plaza Shall mean the use of land, building,
structure, or part thereof, catering to the
goods movement industry and the
traveling public. In addition to the sale of
fuels for motor vehicles, recreational
vehicles, commercial motor vehicles and
heavy motor vehicles and propane
dispensing, a Travel Plaza may include a
retail store, a restaurant, drivers lounge
and personal service uses accessory and
subordinate to the Travel Plaza function.
Travel Plaza component uses may
include, among other things, motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial
motor vehicle and heavy motor vehicle
parking, a weigh scale, a garage -
industrial, and a recreational vehicle,
commercial motor vehicle and heavy
motor vehicle washing establishment.
Waste Disposal Facility Shall mean the use of land for the
placement or final disposal of Waste
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 8 of 83
under controlled conditions in order to
protect environmental and human health
and for which a Certificate of Approval for
such purpose under Part V of the
Environmental Protection Act is required,
and shall include but not be limited to:
sanitary landfills; Industrial, Commercial
and Institutional (ICI) landfills; and,
Demolition and Construction (DC)
landfills. A waste disposal facility may
also include accessory uses including,
but not limited to energy from waste
activities.
Waste Management Facility
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the storage,
processing or disposition of Waste or
Hazardous Waste and for which a
Certificate of Approval for such purpose
under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act is required. Waste
Management Facilities shall include the
following uses: Waste Processing
Facilities; Waste Transfer Facilities;
Hazardous Waste Management
Facilities; and, Waste Disposal Facilities.
Waste Processing Facility
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sorting
and processing of waste and recyclable
materials and for which a Certificate of
Approval for such purpose under Part V
of the Environmental Protection Act is
required. Waste Processing Facilities
shall include but not be limited to:
thermal treatment, blue box recyclable
recovery facilities, open-air or in-vessel
organics processing, wood waste
recycling and/or a co-generation energy
facility, but shall not include a Motor
Vehicle Wrecking Establishment or a
Salvage Yard.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 9 of 83
Waste Transfer Facility Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure or part thereof, for the
temporary storage and collection waste
and for which a Certificate of Approval for
such purpose under Part V of the
Environmental Protection Act is required.
A Waste Transfer Facility may also
include limited sorting of such waste prior
to its transport.
Waste Shall mean materials that are defined as
Waste under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act."
That the definition of Communications Establishment be
amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment used" between the words
"Shall mean" and "for the broadcasting" and replacing it with the
words "the use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by adding the words "and production" between the words "for the
broadcasting" and "of information through".
That the definition of Computer, Electronic and Data Processing
Establishment be amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment used for" between the
words "Shall mean" and "for the research" and replacing it with the
words "the use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by deleting the words "andl" between the words "of electronic
equipment" and "or software.".
That the definition of Lot Line, Side Lot Line be amended by
adding the words "The Hypotenuse of a Daylight Triangle shall also
be a side lot line." after the words "or rear lot line.".
That the definition of Motor Vehicle Service Station be amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment used" between the words
"Shall mean" and "for the sale" and replacing it with the words "the
use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,";
by deleting the words "and/" between the words "automotive
accessories" and "or convenience goods,";
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 10 of 83
by adding the word "Establishment," between the words "Collision
Repair" and "Motor Vehicle Sales";
by adding the word "Establishment," between the words "Sales and
Service" and "Motor Vehicle"; and,
by deleting the term "Motor Vehicle Car Wash" and replacing it with
the term "Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment".
That the definition of Office be amended:
by adding the words "and shall include but not be limited to an
Industrial Administrative Office and a Surveying, Engineering,
Planning or Design Business," between the words "offered or
performed" and "but shall not include"; and,
by deleting the word "a" between the words "Medical Clinic or" and
"Medical Office".
9) That the definition of Planned Business Centre be amended by
adding the words ", and where each business establishment has a
separate entrance located at grade." following the words "for lease
or occupancy1'.
That the definition of Private Club or Lodge be amended:
by deleting the words "a building or part of a building used"
between the words "Shall mean" and "for social, literary" and
replacing it with the words "the use of land, building or structure, or
part thereof,"; and,
by adding the words "or a Labour Association Hall" following the
words "shall not include a Fitness Club".
That the definition of Science and Technology Establishment be
amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment" between the words "Shall
mean" and "where scientific and" and replacing it with the words
"the use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by deleting the words "andl" between the words "development,
manufacturing" and "or technical experimentation".
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 11 of 83
That the definition of Tradesperson's Shop be amended by
deleting the words "a building" between the words "Shall mean" and
"in which is provided" and replacing it with the words "the use of
land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by deleting the word "and" between the words "plumbers shop" and
"other shops" and replacing it with the word "or".
That the definition of Transportation Depot be amended:
by adding the words ", building or structure, or part thereof,"
between the words "the use of land" and "where commercial
motor"; and,
by deleting the words "also include" between the words "purpose
and shall" and "courier service facilities" and replacing it with the
words "include but not be limited to".
That the definition of "Garden Centre" be deleted and replaced
with the following definition:
"Garden Centre Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display
and sale of plants, gardening and
landscaping supplies and equipment."
m) That the definition of "Manufacturing" be deleted and replaced
with the following definition:
"Manufacturing Shall mean the production, fabrication,
compounding, processing, packaging,
crafting, bottling, packing, recycling or
assembling of raw or semi-processed or
fully-processed goods or materials, and
shall include but not be limited to a
Biotechnological Establishment,
Computer, Electronic and Data
Processing Establishment,
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment, Printing Establishment
and/or a Science and Technology
Establishment. Manufacturing may also
include a Private Power Generation
Facility as an accessory use, but shall
not include a Waste Management
Facility."
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 12 of 83
That the definition of "Research and Development
Establishment" be deleted and replaced with the following
definition:
"Research and Development Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the purpose
of conducting pure and applied research,
analysis and experimentation in any field
of science, medicine, technology and
manufacturing and shall include but not
be limited to facilities such as lecture
rooms, administrative off ices,
laboratories, training facilities, display
rooms, pilot plants, prototypical
manufacturing, simulating equipment and
the like, and service and machine shops
to serve the Research and Development
Establishment. A Research and
Development Establishment shall also
include but not be limited to a
Biotechnological Establishment,
Computer, Electronic and Data
Processing Establishment, Laboratory,
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment, and/or a Science and
Technology Establishment."
That the definition of "Warehouse" be deleted and replaced with
the following definition:
"Warehouse Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the bulk
storage or distribution of goods to
industrial, commercial or institutional
business users or other wholesalers, but
shall not include the retailing of goods to
the general public. A Warehouse shall
not include a Waste Management Facility,
Salvage Yard or Towing Establishment."
3. That SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS of By-law 05-200 is hereby
amended as follows:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 13 of 83
a) That Section 4.3 FRONTAGE ON A STREET is amended by
adding the following new subsection:
"c) Notwithstanding a) above, any lot with an Industrial Zone
shall not be required frontage on a public road, unless
otherwise stated in this By-law."
b) That Section 4.12 VACUUM CLAUSE is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
"c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot
within the Industrial Zones of this By-law and the location
thereon of any building or structure, existing on the effective
date of this By-law, shall be deemed to comply with the
regulations for any required setbacks, front yard, flankage
yard, rear yard, lot width, lot area and building height and are
permitted by this By-law."
C) That the following new Sections be added:
"4.23 SPECIAL SETBACKS
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law, the
following Special Setbacks shall apply:
a) Setback from a Provincial Highway Right-of-way
All buildings, structures, required parking areas and
storm water management facilities located on a
property shall be setback a minimum of 14.0 metres
from a Provincial Highway Right-of-way.
b) Setback from a Railway Right-of-way
All buildings or structures within a Residential Zone or
an Institutional Zone shall be setback a minimum of
30.0 metres from a Railway Right-of-way.
c) Setback from a TransCanada Pipeline Right-of-
Way
All buildings or structures located on a property shall
be setback a minimum of 10.0 metres from a
TransCanada Pipeline Right-of-way.
d) Setback from a ConservationlHazard Land (P5)
Zone
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 14 of 83
All buildings or structures located on a property shall
be setback a minimum of 7.5 metres from a P5 Zone
boundary line.
4.24 CONSERVATION AUTHORITY REGULATION AREA
Lands shown on Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps as "CA
Regulation Area" are subject to additional regulation by the
applicable Conservation Authority. Landowners are advised
to contact the appropriate Conservation Authority prior to
any development or site alteration within the area subject to
the Conservation Authority Regulation in order to determine
approval requirement(s).
These boundaries are intended for information and reference
purposes, and are subject to change from time to time
without requiring amendment to this By-law.
4.25 DRIVE THROUGH REGULATIONS
a) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law,
every drive through shall provide the following
minimum number of stacking spaces from the service
window:
- 12 spaces
i) Restaurant
ii) All other uses - 3 spaces
b) No stacking space shall be less than 2.6 metres in
width by 6.0 metres in length, unless otherwise
provided for in this By-law."
4. That SECTION 5: PARKING of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended as
follows:
a) That Section 5.2 DESIGN STANDARDS is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
"5.2.1 LOCATION OF LOADING FACILITIES
The location of loading doors and associated loading
facilities shall be subject to the following:
a) Shall not be permitted within a Front Yard;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page.I 5 of 83
b) Shall not be permitted in any yard abutting a street,
except where screened from view by a Visual Barrier
in accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-law; and,
c) Shall not be permitted in a required yard abutting a
Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone and shall be
screened from view by a Visual Barrier in accordance
with Section 4.1 9 of this By-law."
That Section 5.6 c) Parking Schedule for All Zones, except the
Downtown Zones is amended by adding the following new parking
requirements to subsection iv. Commercial Uses:
Building and Lumber Supply 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Establishment; gross floor area, which
Building or Contracting accommodates the Office, Retail
Supply Establishment and Showroom component of the
use.
Conference or Convention 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Centre gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Courier Establishment 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use.
Financial Establishment 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Hotel 1 for each guest suite.
Medical Clinic, Medical 1 for each 16.0 square metres of
Off ice gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Motor Vehicle Service 4 for each service bay.
Station
Off ice 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
Personal Services 1 for each 16.0 square metres of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 16 of 83
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
Restaurant i) 1 for each 8.0 square metres
of gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
where there are no seats
provided for dining purposes,
a minimum of 3 spaces shall
be required.
Retail 1 for each 20.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
0accommoda tes such use.
Transportation Depot 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
accommodates Off ice
component of the use.
Warehouse 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use."
That Section 5.6~)P arking Schedule for All Zones, except the
Downtown Zones is amended by deleting the following parking
requirements in subsection v. Industrial Uses:
"Biotechnological 1 for each 50.0 square
Establishment; gross floor area, which
Communications accommodates such use.
Establishment;
Computer, Electronic and
Data Processing
Establishment;
Laboratory;
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment;
Printing Establishment;
Research and Development
Establishment (not located
in a MI Zone);
Science and Technology
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 17 of 83
1
Establishment
Manufacturing; 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Warehouse gross floor area, which
accommodates such use."
d ) That Section 5.6 c) Parking Schedule for All Zones, except the
Downtown Zones is amended by adding the following new parking
requirements to subsection v. lndustrial Uses:
"Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Commercial Motor Vehicle 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Sales, Rental and Service gross floor area, which
Establishment accommodates such use.
Commercial Motor Vehicle 4 for each service bay.
Washing Establishment
Communications 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
Establishment gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Contractor's Establishment 1 for each 115.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Dry Cleaning Plant 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Equipment and Machinery 1 for each 100.0 square metres of
Sales, Rental and Service gross floor area, which
Establishment accommod,ates such use.
Industrial Administrative 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Off ice gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Laboratory 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 18 of 83
Labour Association Hall 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Landscape Contracting 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Establishment gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Manufacturing I for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Office
component of the use, plus I for
each 200.0 square metres of gross
floor area, which accommodates
the remainder of the use.
Repair Establishment gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
within an Industrial Zone, the gross floor area.
except an M4 Zone
Planned Business Centre
within an M4 Zone of the gross floor area.
ii) In addition to i) above, where a
Restaurant occupies more
than 30 percent of the gross
floor area of the planned
business centre, the specific
parking requirement for the
Restaurant shall be required in
addition to the planned
business centre requirement
for the remaining gross floor
area of the planned business
centre.
' 1
iii) In addition to i) above, where a
Medical Office or a Medical
Clinic occupies more than 30
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 19 of 83
percent of the gross floor area
of the planned business
centre, the specific parking
requirement for the Medical
Office or Medical Clinic shall
be required in addition to the
planned business centre
requirement for the remaining
gross floor area of the planned
business centre.
Private Power Generation 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Facility gross floor area which
r accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Repair Service 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice, Retail
and Showroom component of the
use.
Research and Development 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
Establishment within an gross floor area which
lndustrial Zone, except an accommodates such use.
MI Zone
Salvage Yard 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Office and
Retail component of the use.
Surveying, Engineering, 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Planning or Design gross floor area which
Business accommodates such use.
Towing Establishment 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use.
Trade School 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
I
I1
Tradesperson's Shop I for each 30.0 square metres of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Paae 20 of 83
gross floor area, which
accommodates the Office, Retail
and Showroom component of the
use.
Transport Terminal 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
w
component of the use.
Waste Management Facility 1 for each 30.0 square metres .of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Office
component of the use, plus 1 for
each 200.0 square metres of gross
floor area, which accommodates
the remainder of the use."
5. That SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES of By-law 05-200 is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsections:
"9.2 GENERAL BUSINESS PARK (M2) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an General Business Parkl (M2) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.2.1 PERMITTED USES Animal Shelter
Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Children's Play-gym
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Communications Establishment
Contractor's Establishment
Courier Establishment
Dry Cleaning Plant
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 21 of 83
Gymnastics Studio
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Landscape Contracting Establishment
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Warehouse
Waste Processing Facility
Waste Transfer Facility
9.2.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.2.1, the
following types of manufacturing
uses are prohibited, except if these
uses are considered only as an
accessory use to another permitted
manufacturing use:
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur
Products
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber or Plastic
Processing or Refining of
Petroleum or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of
Meat, Poultry or Fish or by-
products thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 22 of 83
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explos,ives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.2.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
9.2.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
b) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres
Street
c) Landscaped Area and i) Minimum 3.0 metre wide Landscaped
Planting Strip Requirements Area shall be provided and
maintained abutting a street, except
for points of ingress and egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, where a
parking space, aisle or driveway is
located in a Yard abutting a Street, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
Strip shall be required and
maintained between the said parking
space, aisle or driveway and a
street, except for points of ingress
and egress.
d) Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall be
Outdoor Assembly permitted only as an accessory use and
the following regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in a
Front Yard or a required Flankage
Yard;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 23 of 83
ii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
e) Location of Outdoor Display Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and shall be permitted in a
yard abutting a street, but shall be no
closer than 3.0 metres to the lot line.
f) Location Restriction of i) In addition to the Regulations of
Waste Processing Facility Section 9.2.3, any building, structure
and Waste Transfer Facility or land used for a Waste Processing
Facility or a Waste Transfer Facility,
shall be located a minimum of 300.0
metres from a Residentially Zoned or
Institutionally Zoned property lot line.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.2.1, on
those lots delineated within the
boundaries shown on Figure 4 -
Flamborough Business Park of
Schedule "F" - Special Figures,
Waste Processing Facility and Waste
Transfer Facility shall not be
permitted.
g) Maximum Gross Floor Area An Industrial Administrative Office or a
for lndustrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
h) Maximum Combined Gross 25% of the gross floor area of the
Floor Area for Accessory principal use or 500.0 square metres
Retail and Showroom Area gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
i) Location Restriction for Shall only be permitted on lots delineated
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 24 of 83
Children's Play-gym and with the boundaries shown on Figure 3 -
Gymnastics Studio Ancaster Business Park of Schedule "F"-
Special Figures.
j) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
k) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.2.3 of this By-law.
9.3 PRESTIGE BUSINESS PARK (M3) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.3.1 PERMITTED USES Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Children's Play-gym
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Communications Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Contractor's Establishment
Courier Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Gymnastics Studio
Hotel
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Off ice
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 25 of 83
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
Warehouse
9.3.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.3.1, the
following types of manufacturing
uses are prohibited, even as an
accessory use:
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur
Products
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, Plastic,
Asphalt or Cement, not
including mixing, blending,
treatment or similar process
Processing or Refining of
Petroleum or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of
Meat, Poultry or Fish or by-
products thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.3.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 26 of 83
Place of Worship
9.3.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
b) Yard Abutting a Street i) Minimum 6.0 metres;
ii) Maximum 25.0 metres.
c) Minimum Yard Abutting a 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
.
Residential Zone or an lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Institutional Zone Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone.
d) Maximum Building Height i) 11.0 metres;
Abutting a Residential Zone
or an lnstitutional Zone
ii) In addition to i) above, maximum
building height may be equivalently
increased as yard increases beyond
minimum yard requirement
established in 9.3.3 d) above.
e) Location Restriction of Any building or structure used for
Manufacturing Uses Manufacturing shall be setback a
minimum 20.0 metres from any portion of
a property lot line abutting a property lot
line within a Residential Zone or an
lnstitutional Zone.
f) Restriction of Outdoor Any outdoor training facilities shall be
Training Facilities associated prohibited.
with a Trade School
g) Gross Floor Area for Office Maximum gross floor area for Office use
Use within an individual building, excluding
accessory office, shall be limited to 3,000
square metres.
h) Maximum Gross Floor Area An lndustrial Administrative Office or a
for lndustrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 27 of 83
i) Landscaped Area and i) Minimum 6.0 metre wide Landscaped
Planting Strip Requirements Area shall be provided and
maintained abutting a street, except
for points of ingress and egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, within the 6.0
metre Landscaped Area, a minimum
3.0 metre wide Planting Strip shall be
required and maintained between
parking spaces, aisles or driveways
and a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
iii) In addition to i) above, for properties
adjacent to Trinity Church Road,
south of Rymal Road East, a
minimum 6.0 metre wide Landscaped
Area shall be provided and
maintained;
iv) Where a property lot line abuts a
property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
Strip shall be provided and
maintained.
j) Visual Barrier i) Shall be provided along that portion of
a property lot line abutting a property
lot line within a Residential Zone or
an Institutional Zone, in accordance
with Section 4.1 9 of this By-law;
ii) In addition to i) above, for properties
adjacent to Trinity Church Road,
south of Rymal Road East, a Visual
Barrier shall be required within the
Landscaped Area provided in Section
9.3.3 j) above.
k) Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall be
Outdoor Assembly permitted only as an accessory use and
the following regulations shall apply:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 28 of 83
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in a
Front Yard or a required Flankage
Yard;
ii) In addition to i) above, Outdoor
Storage and Outdoor Assembly shall
not be permitted in a Flankage Yard
along the following streets:
Barton StreetlBarton Street East
Dickenson Road East
Fruitland Road
Garner Road West
Highway No. 5 West
Highway No. 6
Rymal Road East
Shaver Road
South Service Road
Stone Church Road East
Trinity Church Road Extension
Trinity Road
Upper Ottawa Street
Wilson Street West
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iv) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be set back a
minimum of 20.0 metres from any
portion of a property lot line abutting
a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an Institutional
Zone, and shall be screened by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law;
v) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this By-law.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 29 of 83
I) Location and Size of Outdoor Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
Display equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and the following
regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Display shall be permitted in
a yard abutting a street, but shall be
no closer than 3.0 metres to the lot
line;
ii) In addition to i) above, the area
devoted to Outdoor Display shall be
limited to a combined maximum of
25% of the Landscaped Area.
m) Maximum Gross FloorArea 25% of the gross floor area of the
for Accessory Retail and principal use or 500.0 square metres
Showroom Area gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
n) Restriction of Access to Access to Trinity Church Road, south of
Trinity Church Road Rymal Road East, shall be prohibited for
all new development.
o) Location Restriction for Shall only be permitted on lots delineated
Children's Play-gym and with the boundaries shown on Figure 3 -
Gymnastics Studio Ancaster Business Park of Schedule "F" -
Special Figures.
p) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
q) Accessory Buildings i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 9.3.3 of this By-law;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, Section
9.3.3 c) ii) shall not apply.
9.4 BUSINESS PARK SUPPORT (M4) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Business Park Industrial (M4) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 30 of 83
9.4.1 PERMITTED USES Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Children's Play-gym
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Communications Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Contractor's Establishment
Courier Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Financial Establishment
Gymnastics Studio
Hotel
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Medical Clinic
Medical Office
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Office
Personal Services
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Restaurant
Retail
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
Warehouse
9.4.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.4.1, the
following types of manufacturing
uses are prohibited, even as an
accessory use:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 31 of 83
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur
Products
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, Plastic,
Asphalt or Cement, not
including mixing, blending,
treatment or similar process
Processing or Refining of
Petroleum or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging
of Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of
Meat, Poultry or Fish or by-
products thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing
of Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.4.1, the
following uses are prohibited,
even as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dry Cleaning Plant
Dwelling Unit
Place of Worship
9.4.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
b) Yard Abutting a Street i) Minimum 6.0 metres;
ii) Maximum 25.0 metres.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 32 of 83
Minimum Yard Abutting a 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
Residential Zone or an lot line abutting a property lot line within
Institutional Zone a Residential Zone or an Institutional
Zone.
Maximum Building Height i) 11.0 metres;
Abutting a Residential Zone
or an lnstitutional Zone
ii) In addition to i) above, maximum
building height may be equivalently
increased as yard increases beyond
minimum yard requirements
established in 9.4.3 d) above.
Location Restriction of Any building or structure used for
Manufacturing Uses Manufacturing shall be setback a
minimum 20.0 metres from any portion of
a property lot line abutting a property lot
line within a Residential Zone or an
lnstitutional Zone.
Restriction of Outdoor Any outdoor training facilities shall be
Training Facilities prohibited.
associated with a Trade
School
Maximum Combined Gross Shall be limited to a combined total of
Floor Area for Medical Clinic 3,000 square metres gross floor area on
and Medical Office a lot.
Gross Floor Area for Office Maximum gross floor area for Office use
Use within an individual building, excluding
accessory office, shall be limited to
3,000 square metres.
Maximum Gross Floor Area An Industrial Administrative Office or a
for Industrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
Size and Location i) The following uses shall only be
Restriction for Supportive permitted on the ground floor of a
Commercial Uses building or be located at grade on
any lot:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 33 of 83
Financial Establishment
Personal Services
Restaurant
Retail
ii) An individual Retail Establishment
shall be restricted to a maximum
gross floor area of 500.0 square
metres.
k) Landscaped Area and i) Minimum 6.0 metre wide
Planting Strip Requirements Landscaped Area shall be provided
and maintained abutting a street,
except for points of ingress and
egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, within the 6.0
metre Landscaped Area, a minimum
3.0 metre wide Planting Strip shall
be required and maintained between
parking spaces, aisles or driveways
and a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
iii) Where a property lot line abuts a
property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
Strip shall be provided and
maintained.
I) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a property lot
line within a Residential Zone or an
Institutional Zone, in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
m) Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall
Outdoor Assembly be permitted only as an accessory use
and the following regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in
a Front Yard or a required Flankage
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 34 of 83
Yard;
ii) In addition to i) above, Outdoor
Storage and Outdoor Assembly
shall not be permitted in a Flankage
Yard along the following streets:
Barton StreetlBarton Street East
Dickenson Road East
Fruitland Road
Garner Road West
Highway No. 5 West
Highway No. 6
Rymal Road East
Shaver Road
South Service Road
Stone Church Road East
Trinity Church Road Extension
Trinity Road
Upper Ottawa Street
Wilson Street West
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iv) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be set back a
minimum of 20.0 metres from any
portion of a property lot line abutting
a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an Institutional
Zone, and shall be screened by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law;
v) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 35 of 83
n) Location and Size of Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
Outdoor Display equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and the following
regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Display shall be permitted
in yard abutting a street, but shall
be no closer than 3.0 metres to the
lot line;
ii) In addition to i) above, the area
devoted to Outdoor Display shall be
limited to a combined maximum of
25% of the Landscaped Area.
o) Maximum Gross FloorArea 25% of the gross floor area of the
for Accessory Retail and principal use or 500 square metres gross
Showroom Area floor area, whichever is the lesser.
p) Location Restriction for Shall only be permitted on lots delineated
Children's Play-gym and with the boundaries shown on Figure 3 -
Gymnastics Studio Ancaster Business Park of Schedule "F"
- Special Figures.
q) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
r) Accessory Buildings i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 9.4.3 of this By-law;
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, Section
9.4.3 c) ii) shall not apply.
9.5 GENERAL INDUSTRIAL (M5) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an General Industrial (M5) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection
or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.5.1 PERMITTED USES Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 36 of 83
Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage Establishment
:
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial Motor Vehicle Washing
Establishment
Commercial Parking Facility
Communications Establishment
Contractor's Establishment
Courier Establishment
Dry Cleaning Plant
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Financial Establishment
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Landscape Contracting Establishment
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
Off ice
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Restaurant
Salvage Yard
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Towing Establishment
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Warehouse
Waste Processing Facility
Waste Transfer Facility
9.5.2 PROHIBITED USES Notwithstanding Section 9.5.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even as
accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
,To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 37 of 83
9.5.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
b) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres
Street
c) Planting Strip Abutting a Minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting Strip
Street shall be provided and maintained abutting
Burlington Street and Windemere Road,
except for points of ingress and egress,
and shall not include outdoor display.
d) Limitation on Outdoor Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Storage and Outdoor shall not exceed 85% of the total lot area.
Assembly
e) Gross Floor Area for Office Maximum gross floor area for Office use
Use within an individual building, excluding
accessory office, shall be limited to 3,000
square metres.
f) Maximum Gross Floor Area An lndustrial Administrative Office or a
for lndustrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
g) Location Restriction of Waste In addition to the regulations of Section
Processing Facility and 9.5.3, any building, structure or land used
Waste Transfer Facility for a Waste Processing Facility or a
Waste Transfer Facility, shall be located a
minimum of 300.0 metres from a
Residentially Zoned or Institutionally
Zoned property lot line.
h) Maximum Gross FloorArea 25% of the gross floor area of the
for Accessory Retail and principal use or 500.0 square metres
Showroom Area gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
i) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
j) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.5.3 of this By-law.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 38 of 83
9.6 LIGHT INDUSTRIAL (M6) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Light lndustrial (M6) Zone for any purpose other than
one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or
use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.6.1 PERMITTED USES Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial Parking Facility
Communications Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Contractor's Establishment
Courier Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Financial Establishment
Hotel
lndustrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Medical Clinic
Medical Office
Motor Vehicle Collision Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
Off ice
Personal Services
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Restaurant
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
Warehouse
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 39 of 83
9.6.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.6.1, the
following types of manufacturing
uses are prohibited, even as an
accessory use:
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur
Products
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, Plastic,
Asphalt or Cement, not
including mixing, blending,
treatment or similar process
Processing or Refining of
Petroleum or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of
Meat, Poultry or Fish or by-
products thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.6.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dry Cleaning Plant
Dwelling Unit
Place of Worship
9.6.3 REGULATIONS
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 40 of 83
Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres
Minimum Lot Width 45.0 metres
Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres
Street
Minimum Yard Abutting a 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
Residential Zone or an lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Institutional Zone Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone.
Maximum Building Height i) 11.0 metres;
Abutting a Residential Zone
or an lnstitutional Zone
ii) In addition to i) above, maximum
building height may be equivalently
increased as yard increases beyond
minimum yard requirement
established in 9.6.3 d) above.
Location Restriction of Any building or structure used for
Manufacturing Uses Manufacturing shall be setback a
minimum 20.0 metres from any portion of
a property lot line abutting a property lot
line within a Residential Zone or an
lnstitutional Zone.
Restriction of Outdoor Any outdoor training facilities shall be
Training Facilities prohibited.
associated with a Trade
School
Maximum Combined Gross Shall be limited to a combined total of
Floor Area for Medical Clinic 3,000 square metres gross floor area on a
and Medical Office lot.
Gross Floor Area for Office Maximum gross floor area for Office use
Use within an individual building, excluding
accessory office, shall be limited to 3,000
square metres.
Maximum Gross Floor Area An lndustrial Administrative Office or a
for lndustrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 41 of 83
Landscaped Area and i) Minimum 3.0 metre wide Landscaped
Planting Strip Requirements Area shall be provided and
maintained abutting a street, except
for points of ingress and egress;
ii) Where a property lot line abuts a
property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
Strip shall be provided and
maintained.
I) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a property lot line
within a Residential Zone or an
lnstitutional Zone, in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall be
Outdoor Assembly permitted only as an accessory use and
the following regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in a
required yard abutting a street;
ii) In addition to i) above, Outdoor
Storage and Outdoor Assembly shall
not be permitted in a Front Yard or a
Flankage Yard along Barton
StreetlBarton Street East;
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iv) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be set back a
minimum of 20.0 metres from any
portion of a property lot line abutting
a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an Institutional
Zone, and shall be screened by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 42 of 83
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law;
v) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
n) Location and Size of Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
'
Outdoor Display equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and shall be permitted in a
yard abutting a street, but shall be no
closer than 3.0 metres to the lot line.
o) Maximum Gross FloorArea 25% of the gross floor area of the
for Accessory Retail and principal use or 500.0 square metres
Showroom Area gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
p) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
q) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.6.3 of this By-law."
6. That Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended as
follows:
a> by including the Industrial Zone boundaries, as shown on the Maps
numbered 514-515, 548-549, 580-582, 611-613, 642, 749-751,
789-792, 81 7, 828-834, 859, 870-877, 908, 912 -919 , 948-949, 955-
962, 990-992, 1000-10 04, 10 46-10 51, 10 93-10 99, 11 44-11 5 0,
119 8-12 04, 1238, 1254-12 60, 1309-13 13 , 1347-13 48, 1399-14 00,
1433-14 35, 1450-14 53, 1481- 14 84, 1498-15 01, 1528-15 31, 15 45-
1548, 1573-15 74, 1590-15 93, 1634-16 37, 1676-16 78 and 1717 ,
attached in Schedule "1" of this By-law;
b) by including the Open Space and Park Zone boundaries, as shown
on the Maps numbered 549,580- 581, 582,611-612 , 749-751, 790-
792, 830, 832-833, 873-877, 91 5-916 , 918 -919 , 948-949, 961- 962,
990-991, 1003-10 04, 1047, 1049-10 50, 10 93, 1095-10 96, 12 56,
1313 , 1399-14 00, 14 33, 1450-14 52, 1482-14 84, 15 00-15 01, 15 28-
1531, 1547-15 48, 1590-15 91, 1634-16 35, 1676, attached in
Schedule "1" of this By-law;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 43 of 83
c) that Zone Maps 1003 and 1047 be amended by changing the
zoning from the Neighbourhood lnstitutional (I?) Zone to the Light
lndustrial (M6, 366) Zone, for the property known as 734 Rennie
Street, the extent and boundaries of which are shown on Schedule
"2" annexed hereto and forming part of this By-law.
d that Zone Map 950 be amended by changing the zoning from the
Research and Development (MI) Zone to the Research and
Development (MI, 363) Zone, for the property known as 95 Frid
Street, the extent and boundaries of which are shown on Schedule
"3" annexed hereto and forming part of this By-law.
e) that Zone Map 1451 be amended by changing the zoning from the
Neighbourhood lnstitutional (11) Zone to the Prestige Business Park
(M3, 369) Zone, for the property known as 1338 Stone Church
Road East, the extent and boundaries of which are shown on
Schedule "4" annexed hereto and forming part of this By-law.
1 that Zone Map 1003 be amended by changing the zoning from the
f
Community Park (P2) Zone to the Light lndustrial (M6) Zone, for the
property located at the north east corner of Woodward Avenue and
Brampton Street (Woodward Wastewater Treatment Plant), the
extent and boundaries of which are shown on Schedule "5"
annexed hereto and forming part of this By-law.
9) that Zone Maps 919 and 961 be amended by changing the zoning
from the Community Park (P2) Zone to the Light lndustrial (M6)
Zone, for the property located at the south east corner of
Woodward Avenue and Burlington Street East (Woodward
Wastewater Treatment Plant), the extent and boundaries of which
are shown on Schedule "6" annexed hereto and forming part of this
By-law.
h) that Zone Maps 961 and 962 be amended by changing the zoning
from the Community Park (P2) Zone to the Light lndustrial (M6)
Zone and ConservationIHazard Land (P5) Zone, for a portion of the
property known as 700 Woodward Avenue (Woodward Wastewater
Treatment Plant), the extent and boundaries of which are shown on
Schedule "7" annexed hereto and forming part of this By-law.
i) that Zone Maps 919, 961 and 962 be amended by changing the
zoning from the Neighbourhood lnstitutional (11) Zone to the Light
lndustrial (M6) Zone and ConservationIHazard Land (P5) Zone, for
a portion of the property known as 700 Woodward Avenue
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 44 of 83
(Woodward Wastewater Treatment Plant), the extent and
boundaries of which are shown on Schedule "8" annexed hereto
and forming part of this By-law.
That Schedule "C" - Special Exceptions of By-law 05-200 is hereby
amended by adding additional Special Exceptions as follows:
"350. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.6.1, on those lands
zoned Light Industrial (M6) Zone, identified on Maps 870, 871, 913,
914, 91 5, 916 , 956, 957, 958, 959, 1000, 1001 and 1002 of Schedule
"A1'- Zoning Maps and described as addresses:
480 Kenilworth Avenue North (Maps 958,959,1000,1001)
560 Ottawa Street North (Maps 915,916,957,958)
464 Rennie Street (Map 1002)
245 Lottridge Street (Maps 913 ,914,956)
495 Wentworth Street North (Maps 870,871)
21 7-223 Lottridge Street, 103 Clinton Street (Map 956)
the existing Waste Management Facility shall also be permitted.
351. Notwithstanding Section 9.5.3 g), on those lands zoned General
Industrial (M5) Zone, identified on Maps 871, 914, 959, 960, 1001 and
1002 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as addresses:
77 Brant Street (Map 871 )
15 Biggar Avenue (Map 914)
1640 Brampton Street (Maps 959,960,1001, 1002)
the existing Waste Management Facility shall also be permitted.
352. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1147
and 119 8 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 331- 337
Leaside Avenue, the existing Waste Management Facility shall also
be permitted.
353. Notwithstanding Section 9.2.3 f), on those lands zoned General
Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1201 of Schedule "A" -
Zoning Maps and described as 350 Jones Road, the existing Waste
Management Facility shall also be permitted.
354. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1634,
1676 and 1677 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as
addresses:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 45 of 83
899 Nebo Roa'd (Maps 1634, 1676,1677)
900 Nebo Road (Maps 1676)
a Waste Processing Facility and a Waste Transfer Facility shall also
be permitted.
355. In addition Section 9.6.1 and Section 9.6.3, on those lands zoned
Light lndustrial (M6) Zone, identified on Maps 871 and 913 of
Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described as 70 Brant Street and 6
Hillyard Street, a Waste Processing Facility shall also be permitted,
subject to the following special provisions:
a. the Waste Processing Facility shall be limited to the processing
of latex paint; and,
b. the Waste Processing Facility shall only be permitted within the
existing building.
356. Notwithstanding Section 9.2.3 f), on those lands zoned General
-
Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1147 of Schedule " A
Zoning Maps and described as 384-390 Millen Road, a Waste
Processing Facility shall also be permitted.
357. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.6.1, on those lands
zoned Light lndustrial (M6) Zone, identified on Maps 914 and 956 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 239 Lottridge Street,
the existing Hazardous Waste Management Facility shall also be
permitted.
358. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.5.1, on those lands
zoned General lndustrial (M5) Zone, identified on Maps 871, 913 and
914 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as addresses:
227 Brant Street (Maps 871, 91 3, 914 )
52 Imperial Street (Map 914)
the existing Hazardous Waste Management Facility shall also be
permitted.
359. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1498
and 1499 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1650
Upper Ottawa Street, the existing Hazardous Waste Management
Facility shall also be permitted.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 46 of 83
360. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.3.1,
on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1481 and 1528 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1574 Wilson Street
West, Units 1, 2 and 3, the existing Hazardous Waste Management
Facility shall also be permitted.
361. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1050,
1051, 1096 and 1097 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 144-190 South Service Road, Units 162-17 8, a Hazardous Waste
Management Facility shall also be permitted.
362. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1 and Section 9.5.1,
on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone and General
Industrial (M5) Zone, identified on Maps 1048, 1499 and 1546 of
Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described as addresses:
37 Kilbride Road (Maps 1499, 15 46)
460 Kenora Avenue (Map 1048)
a Waste Management Facility shall also be permitted.
363. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.1.1, Section 9.2.1 and
Section 9.3.1, on those lands zoned Research and Development (MI)
Zone, General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige Business Park
(M3) Zone, identified on Maps 950, 1096 and 1501 of Schedule "A" -
Zoning Maps and described as addresses:
95 Frid Street (Map 950)
30 Harlowe Road (Map 1501)
456 Grays Road (Map 1096)
a Gymnastics Studio shall also be permitted.
364. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1147
and 119 8 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 371- 383
Barton Street, a Restaurant shall also be permitted.
365. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1450
and 1451 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 45 Nebo
Road, a Pet Food Store shall also be permitted.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 47 of 83
366. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.6.1 and notwithstanding
Section 9.6.2 ii), on those lands zoned Light lndustrial (M6) Zone,
identified on Maps 956, 957, 1003 and 1047 of Schedule "A" - Zoning
Maps and described as addresses:
734 Rennie Street (Maps 1003,1047)
29 Linden Street (Maps 956,957)
the existing Place of Worship shall also be permitted.
367. In addition to Section 9.2.3, on those lands zoned General Business
Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1200 of Schedule "A" - Zoning
Maps and described as 30 Sunnyhurst Avenue, an accessory garage
to the existing single detached dwelling shall also be permitted,
subject to the following Regulations:
a. Maximum Size 67.0 square metres
b. Minimum Side Yard 1.2 metres
c. Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
d. Maximum Building i) 5.5 metres;
Height
ii) In addition to i) above, the maximum
height of the underside of any fascia
eaves, overhang or the lower ends of
the roof joists, rafters or trusses shall
be 3.0 metres.
e. Location Restriction The accessory garage shall not be
permitted in the required Front Yard.
368. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1499 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1275 Rymal Road
East and 230 Lancing Drive, the following uses shall also be
permitted:
a. Medical Office
b. Medical Clinic
c. Home Furnishings Retail Establishment
d. Restaurant
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 48 of 83
369. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1, Section 9.3.1 and
Section 9.4.1 and notwithstanding Section 9.3.2 ii) and 9.4.2 ii), on
those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone, Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone and Business Park Support (M4) Zone,
identified on Maps 1096, 114 5, 1450, 1451, 1452, 1501, 1547, 1548
and 1592 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as
addresses:
1338 Stone Church Road East (Map 1451)
1545 Stone Church Road East (Map 1452)
11 50 Stone Church Road East (Map 1450)
60 Harlowe Road, Units 12 and 13 (Map 15 01 )
75 Harlowe Road (Map 1501)
1562 Rymal Road East (Maps 1547,1548,1592)
2799 Barton Street East (Maps 1096,1145)
1439 Upper Ottawa Street (Map 1450)
a Place of Worship shall also be permitted.
370. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1 and notwithstanding
Section 9.3.2 ii), on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3)
Zone, identified on Maps 1500, 1501, 1547, and 1548 of Schedule " A
- Zoning Maps and described as 250 Pritchard Road, a Place of
Worship shall also be permitted.
371. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.6.1 and notwithstanding
Section 9.6.2 i), on those lands zoned Light Industrial (M6) Zone,
identified on Maps 870 and 871 of Schedule "A1'- Zoning Maps and
described as 495 Wentworth Street North, a Salvage Yard shall also
be permitted.
372. Notwithstanding Section 5.2.1 a), Section 5.6 c) only as it relates to
the parking requirement for Manufacturing and Section 9.3.3 b) ii), on
those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified' on
Maps 1591 and 1635 of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described
as 863 Nebo Road, the following special provisions shall apply:
a. Loading doors and associated loading facilities shall be
permitted within a Front Yard, subject to being screened
from view by a Visual Barrier in accordance with Section
4.1 9 of this By-law; and,
b. Parking for Manufacturing A minimum of 199 parking
spaces shall be provided
and maintained.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 49 of 83
c. Section 9.3.3 b) ii) shall not apply.
373. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.3.1,
on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 114 6, 114 7, 11 98 and
11 99 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as addresses:
299 Barton Street (Mountain View Public School) (Map 1146)
481 Barton Street, 340-346 Leaside Avenue (Mohawk College of
Applied Arts and Technology - STARRT Institute) (Maps 11 47, 11 98
and 11 99)
an Educational Establishment shall also be permitted.
374. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1203,
1204, 1257, 1258 and 1452 of Schedule "A1' - Zoning Maps and
described as addresses:
1599 Stone Church Road East (Map 1452)
395 Lewis Road (Maps 1203,1204,1257,1258)
a Home Furnishings Retail Establishment shall also be permitted.
375. On those lands affected by this subsection and zoned General
lndustrial (M5) Zone and Light lndustrial (M6) Zone, identified on
Maps 829, 870, 871, 912, 913, 914, 915, 956, 957, 958 and 959 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following special provisions shall
also apply:
a. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.5.1 and Section
9.6.1 and notwithstanding Section 9.5.2 and Section 9.6.2 ii),
the existing Dwelling Unit(s) shall also be permitted;
b. Notwithstanding Section 9.5.3 b), 9.6.3 b) and Section 9.6.3
d), alteration and extension to the existing Dwelling Unit(s)
shall be permitted subject to the following Regulations:
i) Minimum Front 6.0 metres
Yard
ii) Maximum Building 14.0 metres
Height
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 50 of 83
c. In addition to Section 9.5.3 and Section 9.6.3, alteration and
extension to the existing Dwelling Unit(s) shall be permitted
subject to the following Regulations:
i) Minimum Side 0.6 metres
Yard
ii) Minimum Rear 7.5 metres
Yard
376. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 b) and Section 9.3.3 i), within the
boundaries of the lands affected by this subsection and zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1434 and 1483
of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following special provisions shall
also apply:
a. Garner Road West shall be deemed to be the front lot line;
b. Minimum Yard 3.0 metres
Abutting Osprey
Drive
c. Landscaped Area i) Minimum 3.0 metre width shall
Abutting Osprey be provided and maintained,
Drive except for points of ingress and
egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, where a
parking space, aisle or driveway
is located in a yard abutting
Osprey Drive, a minimum 3.0
metre wide Planting Strip shall be
required and maintained between
the said parking space, aisle or
driveway and Osprey Drive,
except for points of ingress and
egress.
377. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1482 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1492 Wilson Street
West, the following uses shall also be permitted:
a. Restaurant
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 51 of 83
b. Financial Establishment
378. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 7.5.1 and Section 9.3.1,
on those lands zoned Consen/ation/Hazard Land (P5) Zone and
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1481 and 1482
of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1505 Wilson Street
West, a Golf Course shall also be permitted.
379. Notwithstanding Section 5.1 a) v), Section 5.2.1 b), Section 9.3.2 ii),
Section 9.3.3 b), Section 9.3.3 i), Section 9.3.3 k) and Section 9.3.3 I),
on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on
Maps 1546 and 1591 of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described
as 583-595 Nebo Road and 615 Nebo Road, the following special
provisions shall apply:
a. A manufacturing operation involving the primary production
of concrete and the recycling of concrete shall also be
permitted;
b. Section 5.1 a) v), Section 5.2.1 b), Section 9.3.3 c), Section
9.3.3 i), Section 9.3.3 k) and Section 9.3.3 1) shall not apply
to the use identified in a. above.
380. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 b) and Section 9.3.3 i), within the
boundaries of the lands affected by this subsection and zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1481 and 1482
of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following special provisions shall
also apply:
a. Wilson Street shall be deemed to be the front lot line;
b. Minimum Yard 3.0 metres
Abutting Sandhill
Drive
c. Landscaped Area i) Minimum 3.0 metre width shall
Abutting Sandhill be provided and maintained,
Drive except for points of ingress and
egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, where a
parking space, aisle or driveway
is located in a yard abutting
Sandhill Drive, a minimum 3.0
metre wide Planting Strip shall be
required and maintained between
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 52 of 83
the said parking space, aisle or
driveway and Sandhill Drive,
except for points of ingress and
egress.
381. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1434
and 1483 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1034
Garner Road West, the following uses shall also be permitted:
a. Restaurant
b. the existing Dwelling Unit
382. In addition Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.2.3, on those lands zoned
General Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1529 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 61 1 Tradewind Drive,
an Office shall also be permitted, provided that the maximum gross
floor area shall not be 10,000 square metres or greater.
383. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1433
and 1482 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 0 Portia
Drive, the following uses shall also be permitted:
a. Motor Vehicle Sales and Service Establishment
b. Veterinary Service
c. Retail
d. Farm Product Supply Dealer
e. Major Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service Establishment
384. In addition to the Regulations of Section 9.3.3, on those lands zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1433 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 0 Portia Drive, the
Minimum Rear Yard shall be 15.0 metres.
385. Notwithstanding Section 9.6.2 i), on those lands zoned Light Industrial
(M6) Zone, identified on Map 859 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and
described as 32-40 Head Street, the Primary Production of Chemicals
as part of the existing Manufacturing use shall also be permitted.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 53 of 83
386. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.3.1,
on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 580, 581, 61 1 and 612
of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 27 Highway 5 West,
Recreation shall also be permitted.
387. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.6.1 and notwithstanding
Section 9.6.2 i), Section 9.6.3 j) i) and Section 9.6.3 1) v), on those
lands zoned Light Industrial (M6) Zone, identified on Maps 871 and
913 of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described as 80 Brant Street,
the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. A Salvage Yard shall also be permitted;
b. Section 9.6.3 j) i) and Section 9.6.3 1) v) shall not apply.
388. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 b) and Section 9.3.3 i), within the
boundaries of the lands affected by this subsection and zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 515 and 549 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following special provisions shall
also apply:
a. Minimum Yard Abutting 3.0 metres
a Street
b. Landscaped Area i) Minimum 3.0 metre width
shall be provided and
maintained, except for points
of ingress and egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, where
a parking space, aisle or
driveway is located in a yard
abutting a street, a minimum
3.0 metre wide Planting Strip
shall be required and
maintained between the said
parking space, aisle or
driveway and a street, except
for points of ingress and
egress.
389. On those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on
Maps 580 and 61 1 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as
91 Highway 5 West (Coreslab), the following special provisions shall
also apply:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 54 of 83
a. In addition to Section 9.2.3 c), the following Landscaped Area
regulations shall also apply:
i) Minimum 5.0 metre width shall be provided and
maintained along the northerly lot line;
ii) Minimum 5.0 metre width shall be provided and
maintained along the westerly lot line from the rear lot line
south to a distance of 408 metres;
iii) Minimum 50.0 metre width, including a minimum 7.5
metre high berm, shall be provided and maintained along
the easterly lot line from the rear lot line south to a
distance of 243 metres; and,
iv) Minimum 10.0 metre width, including a minimum 3.5
metre high noise wall, shall be provided and maintained
along the easterly lot line from the southerly limit of the
Landscaped Area as required in a. iii) above, south to a
distance of 165 metres.
b. In addition to Section 9.2.3 d), the following regulation shall
also apply:
Outdoor Upon removal of the "H" Holding symbol, the
Storage lands within 20.0 metres of the westerly limit
of the Landscaped Area, as required in a. iii)
above, shall only be used for the outdoor
storage of operational assets of the permitted
Manufacturing use, to a maximum height of
3.0 metres.
c. In addition to Section 9.2.3, the following regulation shall also
apply:
Easterly Side Minimum 300 metres for all Buildings and
Yard Structures within 408 metres of the northerly
rear lot line.
d. An accessory crushing operation shall only be permitted on the
west side of the existing Building or Structure.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 55 of 83
390. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1500
and 1501 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 320
Anchor Road, a Correction Facility shall also be permitted.
391. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1451
and 1500 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 4-6
Dartnall Road, the existing Garden Centre shall also be permitted.
392. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1500 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 10 Dartnall Road, the
existing Retail and existing Farm Product Supply Dealer shall also be
permitted.
393. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1 and notwithstanding
Section 9.3.2 ii), on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3)
Zone, identified on Map 1500 of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and
described as 81 Dartnall Road, the following uses shall also be
permitted:
a. the existing Dwelling Unit(s)
b. a Snow Removal Service
394. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1499
and 1546 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 11 88
Rymal Road East, the following uses shall also be permitted:
a. Retail
b. Home Furnishings Retail Establishment
c. Restaurant
d. Personal Services
e. Medical Office
395. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1547 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 245 Dartnall Road, an
Animal Shelter shall also be permitted.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 56 of 83
396. On those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified
on Maps 1452 and 1501 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and
described as 1520 Stone Church Road East, the following special
provisions shall apply:
a. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 j), the following regulation
shall apply:
Landscaped Area and i) Minimum 3.5 metre wide
Planting Strip Landscaped Area shall be
Requirements provided and maintained
abutting Stone Church
Road East, except for
points of ingress and
egress;
ii) Minimum 2.6 metre wide
Landscaped Area shall be
provided and maintained
abutting Anchor Road,
except for points of ingress
and egress;
b. In addition to Section 9.3.3, the following regulations shall
also apply:
Special Regulations for i) Maximum of 53 rooms
Hotel
ii) Maximum Building Height:
27.0 metres and 8 storeys
c. Notwithstanding Section 5.6 c), only as it relates to the
parking requirements for Conference or Convention Centre
and Hotel, the following shall apply:
Parking for the Existing A minimum of 175 parking
Conference or spaces shall be provided and
Convention Centre and maintained.
Hotel
d. Notwithstanding Section 5.1 a) i), a total of 44 of the required
175 parking spaces shall be provided and maintained at the
property known as 270 Anchor Road.
397. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1199 of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 57 of 83
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 615 Barton Street, a
Private Club shall also be permitted.
398. In addition Section 9.2.1, Section 9.2.3, Section 9.3.1 and Section
9.3.3, on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1146 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 263-265 Barton Street
and 333 Green Road, the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. The following uses shall also be permitted:
i) Commercial School
ii) Financial Institution
iii) Retail
b. The uses identified in a. above, shall only be permitted within
the existing buildings.
399. In addition to Section 9.3.1 and Section 9.3.3, on those lands zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1149 and 1200
of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 650 South Service
Road, the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. One Freestanding Restaurant and one Freestanding
Financial Establishment shall also be permitted, subject to
the following regulations:
i) Notwithstanding a. above, a Restaurant and a
Financial Establishment shall only be permitted
where a building(s) has been constructed within 100
metres of Fruitland Road and where that building(s)
has a minimum total gross floor area of 2,700 square
metres.
ii) No drive through facility shall be permitted even as
an accessory use.
iii) The minimum gross floor area of a Restaurant shall
be 550 square metres.
iv) The minimum gross floor area of a Financial
Establishment shall be 550 square metres.
v) The maximum combined floor area for freestanding
restaurants and freestanding financial
establishments shall be 1,500 square metres.
vi) The minimum setback from Fruitland Road for a
Freestanding Restaurant and a Freestanding
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 58 of 83
Financial Establishment shall be 100 metres.
400. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1200 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 348-354 Fruitland
Road, a Landscape Contracting Establishment shall also be
permitted.
401. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1 and notwithstanding
Section 9.3.2 i), on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3)
Zone, identified on Map 1149 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and
described as 404 Fruitland Road, the existing Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment shall also be permitted.
402. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.3.1,
within the boundaries of the lands affected by this subsection and
zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige Business Park
(M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1203, 1204, 1257 and 1258 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following uses shall also be
permitted:
a. Home Furnishings Retail Establishment
b. Restaurant
403. In addition to Section 9.2.1, Section 9.2.3 and Section 9.3.1, on those
lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige Business
Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1257 and 1310 of Schedule "A" -
Zoning Maps, and described as 1081 Barton Street, the following
special provisions shall also apply:
a. The following uses shall also be permitted:
i) Financial Establishment
ii) Office
iii) Conference or Convention Centre
b. In addition to Section 9.2.3, the following regulation shall apply
to Office Use:
Maximum gross floor area for Office use within an individual
building, excluding accessory office, shall be limited to 3,000
square metres.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 59 of 83
404. On those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified
on Maps 1260, 1312 and 1313 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and
described as 1640 South Service Road, the following special
provisions shall also apply:
a. In addition to Section 9.3.1, the following uses shall also be
permitted:
i) Tourist Information Centre
ii) Travel Plaza
iii) Commercial Recreation
iv) Financial Establishment
v) Medical Clinic
vi) Restaurant accessory to all permitted uses
b. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 a), Section 9.3.3 b) and
Section 9.3.3 i), the following Regulations shall apply:
i) Minimum Lot Area 6,000 square metres
ii) Minimum Lot 50.0 metres
Width
iii) Minimum Front 14.0 metres
Yard for all uses
except a Travel
Plaza
iv) Minimum 10 percent of the lot area, and
Landscaped Open which shall include the following:
Space
1. A landscaped strip having a
minimum width of 7.5
metres shall be provided
and maintained adjacent to
any street except for points
of ingress and egress;
2. A landscaped strip having a
minimum width of 4.0
metres shall be provided
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 60 of 83
and maintained along the
easterly lot line, save and
except for that portion of the
lands zoned Conservation I
Hazard Lands (P5) Zone;
Notwithstanding the
landscaped strip
requirements identified in 2.
above, no landscaped strip
shall be required to be
provided on the lands
adjacent to.t he lands zoned
ConservationIHazard Lands
(P5) Zone;
4. A landscaped strip having a
minimum width of 1.5
metres shall be provided
and thereafter maintained
adjacent to the southerly
and westerly lot lines.
c. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 b) and in addition to b. above,
the following Front Yard Requirements shall apply to a
Travel Plaza:
i) Maximum Front Yard 72.0 metres
(excluding setback to
fuel pump islands, fuel
pumps, light standards
and signage)
ii) Minimum Front Yard to 75.0 metres
Motor Vehicle and
Recreational Vehicle
Fuel Pump Islands and
Propane Dispensing
Area
iii) Minimum Front Yard to 120.0 metres
Commercial Motor
Vehicle and Heavy
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 61 of 83
Motor Vehicle Fuel
Pump Islands
iv) Minimum Front Yard to None
Light Standards
d. In addition to Section 9.3.3, the following regulations shall
also apply:
i) Maximum Lot 50 percent
Coverage
ii) Minimum Side Yard to 4.0 metres
Weigh Scale
iii) Minimum Rear Yard 7.0 metres
iv) Within the Travel Plaza, a maximum of 650 square
metres of the gross floor area may be used for
Retail.
e. Section 9.3.3 g) and Section 9.3.3 h) shall not apply.
405. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.3.1,
on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige
-
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1256 of Schedule "A"
Zoning Maps and described as 967-977 Barton Street, the existing
Mini Golf and the existing Golf Driving Range shall also be permitted.
406. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.2 i), on those lands zoned Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1591 of Schedule " A -
Zoning Maps and described as 669 Nebo Road, a manufacturing
operation involving the primary production of asphalt or cement shall
also be permitted.
407. In addition to Section 9.3.1 and Section 9.3.3 and notwithstanding
Section 3 only as it relates to the definition of Building or Contracting
Supply Establishment, on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park
(M3) Zone, identified on Map 1452 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps
and described as 1525 Stone Church Road East, the following special
provisions shall also apply:
a. The following uses shall also be permitted:
i) Financial Establishment
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 62 of 83
ii) Restaurant
iii) Fitness Club
iv) Bowling Alley, including an accessory restaurant
b. The following Regulation shall also apply:
Restriction for i) Shall be limited to one
Restaurant Use Restaurant on the property, not
including a restaurant accessory
to a Bowling Alley;
ii) In addition to i) above, no drive-
thru or stacking lane shall be
located between any building and
a street line.
c. For the purpose of this special exception, a Building or
Contracting Supply Establishment shall be defined as
follows:
"Shall mean the use of land, building or structure, or part
thereof, in which building, construction or home improvement
materials are stored or offered for wholesale or retail sale."
408. On those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified
on Map 1500 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 50
Dartnall Road, the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. In addition to Section 9.3.3, the following regulations shall
also apply:
i) Minimum Northerly Side 1.4 metres
Yard
ii) Minimum Rear Yard 2.8 metres
b. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 i), Section 9.3.3 k) v) and
Section 5.2 e), the following regulations shall apply:
i) Landscaped Area and 1. Minimum 3.0 metre
Planting Strip width shall be provided
Requirements and maintained, except
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 63 of 83
for points of ingress and
egress;
In addition to i) above,
where a parking space,
aisle or driveway is
located in a yard
abutting a street, a
minimum 3.0 metre
wide Planting Strip shall
be required and
maintained between the
said parking space,
aisle or driveway and a
street, except for points
of ingress and egress.
ii) Screening of Outdoor Outdoor Storage and
Storage and Outdoor Outdoor Assembly shall be
Assembly screened from view from any
abutting street by a Visual
Barrier having a minimum of
1.5 metres and a maximum
height 3.0 metres.
iii) Existing Parking Area The existing gravel parking
area, maneuvering space,
loading space and access
driveway shall also be
permitted.
409. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.2 i), on those lands zoned Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1545 and 1546 of
Schedule "A1' - Zoning Maps and described as 1680 Upper Ottawa
Street, a manufacturing operation involving the primary production of
asphalt shall also be permitted.
410. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1, on those lands
zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1148 of
-
Schedule "A" Zoning Maps and described as 560 Seaman Street,
Commercial Recreation shall also be permitted.
41 1. On those lands zoned Light Industrial (M6) Zone, identified on Map
1238 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1050-1056
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 64 of 83
Upper Wellington Street, Section 9.6.3 1) iv) shall not apply to the
existing Building and Lumber Supply Establishment.
412. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.1, on those lands zoned Prestige
Business Park (M3), identified on Map 1501 of Schedule "A" - Zoning
Maps and described as 38 Bigwin Road, a Motor Vehicle Collision
Repair Establishment shall not be permitted.
413. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 f), on those lands zoned Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1545, 1590 and 1591 of
-
Schedule " A Zoning Maps and described as 610 Nebo Road,
Section 9.3.3 f) shall not apply.
414. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and 9.6.1 and
notwithstanding Section 9.2.2 i) and Section 9.6.2 i), on those lands
zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Light Industrial (M6)
Zone, identified on Maps 1047, 1048, 1093, 1094, 1095 and 1096 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as:
20 Brockley Drive (Maps 1095, 1096)
21 Brockley Drive (Map 1095)
330 Nash Road (Maps 1047,1048,1093,1094)
the following uses shall also be permitted:
a. Restaurant
b. Beverage Distillation
c. Breweries
d. Processing, Milling or Packaging of Animal Feed
e. Slaughtering, Eviscerating, Rendering or Cleaning of Meat,
Poultry or Fish or by-products thereof
415. Notwithstanding Section 3 only as it relates to the definition of
Warehouse, on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone,
identified on Maps 1547 and 1592 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and
described as 90 Glover Road, retail accessory to a Warehouse shall
also be permitted.
416. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1634 of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New lndustrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 65 of 83
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 858 Nebo Road, a
Towing Establishment shall also be permitted.
417. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.6.1, on those lands
zoned Light lndustrial (M6) Zone, identified on Maps 1047 and 1093
of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described as 279 Nash Road and
2255 Barton Street East, Retail shall also be permitted.
418. On those lands zoned Light lndustrial (M6) Zone, identified on Maps
915, 916, 957 and 958 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 560 Ottawa Street North, the following shall also apply:
a. Section 9.6.3 j) shall not apply to that portion of the property
abutting Beach Road;
b. In addition to Section 9.6.3, for development abutting Beach
Road, a Visual Barrier shall be provided along that portion of
the property lot line abutting Beach Road, in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
419. Notwithstanding Section 9.5, within the boundaries of the lands
affected by this subsection and zoned General lndustrial (M5) Zone,
identified on Maps 958, 1000, 1001 and 1002 of Schedule "A" -
Zoning Maps, the following special provisions shall only apply:
a. The following uses shall only be permitted:
i) Railway terminal and uses, buildings and structures
accessory thereto, including commercial, industrial
and office uses; and,
ii) Transport Terminal.
b. Dwelling unit shall be prohibited.
420. In addition to Section 9.2.1 and notwithstanding Section 9.2.3 c) and
Section 5.6 c) only as it relates to the parking requirement for a Place
of Worship, on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone,
identified on Map 1095 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 80-86 Covington Street and 86 Cascade Street, the following
special provisions shall also apply:
a. A Place of Worship shall also be permitted;
b. Section 9.2.3 c) shall not apply to a Place of Worship;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 66 of 83
c. Parking for the Place of A minimum of 188 parking
Worship spaces shall be provided and
maintained.
421. On those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on
-
Map 1095 of Schedule "A" Zoning Maps and described as 70
Covington Street, Section 5.2.1 a) and Section 5.2.1 b) shall not apply
to the existing building.
422. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1, on those lands
zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1200 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 29-35 Sunnyhurst
Avenue, a Motor Vehicle Service Station shall also be permitted.
423. In addition to Section 9.3.1 and notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 m), on
those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on
Maps 1200 and 1254 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 681-695 Barton Street, the following special provisions shall also
apply:
a. A Circus School shall also be permitted;
b. The maximum gross floor area devoted to accessory retail
and showroom area shall be 1,120 square metres for any
permitted use.
424. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1434
and 1483 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1046
Garner Road West, the following uses shall also be permitted:
a. Financial Establishment
b. Restaurant
425. Within the boundaries of the lands affected by this subsection and
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1636
-
and 1637 of Schedule "A" Zoning Maps, the following special
provisions shall also apply:
a. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 a), the following regulations
shall apply:
i) Minimum Lot Area 3,000 square metres
ii) Minimum Lot Width 25.0 metres
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 67 of 83
b. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.2 ii) and Section 9.3.3 b) and in
addition to Section 9.3.3, an accessory dwelling unit shall
also be permitted, subject to the following regulations:
i) Yard Abutting a 1. Minimum 6.0 metres;
Street
2. Maximum 15.0 metres
ii) Maximum Dwelling 180.0 square metres
Size
c. Section 9.3.3 j) ii) and Section 9.3.3 n) shall not apply.
426. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, on those lands
zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Map 1482 of
-
Schedule "A" Zoning Maps and described as 1330 Sandhill Drive, a
Martial Arts Studio shall also be permitted.
427. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1 and Section 9.3.1,
on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone and Prestige
Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 612,1148, 1199, 1482
and 1529 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as
addresses:
12 Innovation Drive (Map 612 )
1378 Sandhill Drive (Map 1482 and 1529)
1442 Osprey Drive (Map 1529)
51 5 Arvin Avenue (Map 114 8 and 119 9)
a Dance Studio shall also be permitted.
428. On those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified
on Map 1484 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 754
Shaver Road, the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1, a Tennis
School shall also be permitted;
b. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 j) i) and Section 9.3.3 j) ii), a
minimum 2.8 metre wide landscaped area shall be provided
and maintained abutting a street, except for points of ingress
and egress;
c. Notwithstanding Section 5.2 e), the portion of the parking
areas at the north side of the building containing nine
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 68 of 83
parking spaces shall be constructed with a hardldustless
compact surface instead of being constructed with a stable
surface of concrete or asphalt.
429. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.2.1, on those lands
zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1482 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 1370 Sandhill Drive, a
Music School shall also be permitted.
430. On those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified
on Map 1148 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 565
Seaman Street, the following special provisions shall also apply:
a. In addition to the uses permitted in Section 9.3.1,
Commercial Recreation, including an accessory restaurant
shall also be permitted;
b. Notwithstanding Section 5.6 c) only as it relates to the
parking requirement for Commercial Recreation, a minimum
of 180 parking spaces shall be provided and maintained.
431. On those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified
on Maps 61 1 and 642 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 91 Highway 5 West (Block 1I ), the following special provisions
shall also apply:
a. In addition to Section 9.3.1, the following uses shall also be
permitted:
i) Landscape Contracting Establishment
ii) Waste Processing Facility
iii) Waste Transfer Facility
b. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.2, the following uses shall be
prohibited:
PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section
9.3.1, the following types of
manufacturing uses are
prohibited, except if these
uses are considered only as
an accessory use to another
permitted manufacturing
use:
Beverage Distillation
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 69 of 83
Breweries
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur
Products
Primary Production of
Chemicals, Synthetic
Rubber or Plastic
Processing or Refining of
Petroleum or Coal
Processing, Milling or
Packaging of Animal
Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning
of Meat, Poultry or Fish
or by-products thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical
Processing of Pelts or
Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or
Rubber Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section
9.3.1, the following uses are
prohibited, even as
accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
c. Notwithstanding Section 9.3.3 b), Section 9.3.3 i), Section
9.3.3 k) and Section 9.3.3 I), the following regulations shall
apply:
i) Minimum Yard 3.0 metres
Abutting a
Street
ii) Landscaped 1. Minimum 3.0 metre wide
Area and Landscaped Area shall be
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 70 of 83
Planting Strip provided and maintained
Requirements abutting a street, except for
points of ingress and
egress;
In addition to i) above,
where a parking space, aisle
or driveway is located in a
Yard abutting a street, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide
Planting Strip shall also be
required and maintained
between the said parking
space, aisle or driveway and
a street, except for points of
ingress and egress.
iii) Location and Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Screening of Assembly of goods, materials or
Outdoor equipment shall be permitted
Storage and only as an accessory use and the
Outdoor following regulations shall apply:
Assembly
1. Outdoor Storage and
Outdoor assembly shall be
permitted in a yard abutting
a street, but shall be no
closer than 3.0 metres to the
lot line;
2. Outdoor Storage and
Outdoor Assembly shall not
exceed 85% of the total lot
area;
3. Outdoor Storage and
Outdoor Assembly shall be
screened from view from
any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance
with Section 4.19 of this By-
law.
iv) Location of Outdoor Display of goods,
Outdoor Display materials or equipment shall be
permitted only as an accessory
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 71 of 83
use and shall be permitted in a
yard abutting a street, but shall
be no closer than 3.0 metres to
the lot line.
432. In addition to Section 9.3.1 and Section 9.3.3, on those lands zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1451, 1452,
1500 and 1501 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 230
Anchor Road, Retail shall also be permitted only within the existing
building.''
433. Notwithstanding Section 5.6 c), 9.5.3 b) and 9.5.3 c), on those lands
zoned General Industrial (M5) Zone, identified on Maps 749-751, 789-
791, 830-832, 872-874 and 914-916 and described as 386 Wilcox
Street, Sections 5.6 c), 9.5.3 b) and 9.5.3 c) shall not apply.
434. In addition to Section 9.2.1, on those lands zoned General Business
Park (M2) Zone, identified on Map 1529 of Schedule " A - Zoning
Maps and described as 680 Tradewind Drive, Commercial Recreation
shall also be permitted.
8. That Schedule "D" - Holding Provisions of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended
by adding additional Holding Provisions as follows:
"24. Notwithstanding Section 9.2 and Special Exception No. 389 of this
By-law, on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone,
identified on Map 580 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 91 Highway 5 West, site alteration shall not be permitted until a
Certificate of Approval has been granted by the Ministry of the
Environment pursuant to Section 9 of the Environmental Protection
-Act, for the Open Storage of operational assets with restrictions on
loading and unloading during non-daytime hours.
25. Notwithstanding Section 9.3 and Special Exception No. 401 of this
By-law, on those lands zoned Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone,
identified on Map 1149 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described
as 404 Fruitland Road, the subject property shall be used only for the
uses existing on the date of the passing of this By-law until such time
as an Environmental Report which indicates that it is environmentally
sound to develop any of the permitted uses on the site has been
completed and approved by the Director of Planning.
26. Notwithstanding Section 9.2 and Special Exception No. 405 of this
By-law, on those lands zoned General Business Park (M2) Zone,
identified on Map 1256 of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps and described
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 72 of 83
as 967-977 Barton Street, site alteration shall be conditional upon the
following:
a. Channelization is undertaken in addition to the replacement
of undersized culverts associated with the Canadian
National Railway tracks as may be required by the Hamilton
Region Conservation Authority;
b. The details of any proposed drainage works are approved by
the Hamilton Region Conservation Authority;
c. Any alternatives to the existing drainage pattern affecting the
Canadian National Railway property have received the prior
concurrence of the Railways and has been substantiated by
a drainage report satisfactory to the Railway;
d. All relevant servicing requirements including storm drainage,
water, sanitary sewers and road design have been approved
by the Director of Planning; and,
e. A subdivision agreement or modified development
agreement has been entered into by the owner with the City
of Hamilton.
27. Notwithstanding Section 9.4 of this By-law, on those lands zoned
Business Park Support (M4) Zone, identified on Maps 949 and 991 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 611 Aberdeen
Avenue, site alteration shall be conditional upon the following:
a. Provision of an adequate sanitary sewer outlet to service the
subject property directly;
b. Dedication to the City of Hamilton, if required, of a portion(s)
of the subject property for road widening purposes; and,
c. Final approval of the West Hamilton Innovation District
Secondary Plan.
28. Notwithstanding Section 9.3 of this By-law, on those lands zoned
Prestige Business Park (M3) Zone, identified on Maps 1501 and
1548 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as lands located
at the southwest corner of Highland Road and the Future Trinity
Church Road Extension, site alteration shall be conditional upon the
following:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 73 of 80
a. The Owner completing a hydrogeological and geotechnical
study, to the satisfaction of the Director of Development
Engineering, in consultation with the Senior Director of
Water and Wastewater Division, and the Planning Director of
the Hamilton Conservation Authority; and,
b. The Owner submitting and implementing a functional
servicing report that addresses such matters as, but is not
limited to, stormwater management and sanitary capacity for
proposed development densities, to the satisfaction of the
Director of Development Engineering."
9. That Schedule "F" - Special Figures of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended by
adding Special Figure 3 and Special Figure 4.
10. That the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
notice of passing of this By-law in accordance with the Planning Act.
11. That this By-law No. 10-128 shall come into force and be deemed to have
come into force in accordance with Subsection 34(21) of the Planning Act,
either upon the date of passage of this By-law or as provided by the said
Subsection.
gPASSEDL tha is 26thJ, day o,nfk M , a y 2010.
Fred Eisenberger
Mayor
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 74 of 83
-
Schedule 1 Zoning Maps
Please see attached binder for Maps
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 75 of 83
Schedule 2
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 76 of 83
Schedule 3
This is Schedule "3"t o By-Law No. 10- 128 - - - - -
Subject Property
Schedule "3"
95 rid Street, Hamilton
Change In Zoning born the Research and
Development (MI) Zone to the Research
Map Forming Part of and Development (MI, 363) Zone
By-Law No. 10- 128
to Amend By-law No.05-200
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 77 of 83
Schedule 4
This is Schedule "4" to By-Law No. 10128
Schedule "4"
Change in Zoning from Neighbourhood Institutional
(11) Zone to the Prestige Business Park (M3,369)
Map Forming Part of
By-Law No. 10- 128
to Amend By-law No.05-200
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 78 of 83
Schedule 5
This is Schedule "5" to By-Law No. 10-128
Passed the .26* day ofmy ................., 2010
Map Forming Part of
By-Law No. 10- 128
to Amend By-law No.05-200
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 79 of 83
Schedule 6
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 80 of 83
Schedule 7
This IS Schedule "7" to By-Law No. 10- 128
Passed the26th ..... day of ...May.. ............. 2010
Schedule "7"
Change in Zoning from Community Park (PZ) Zone
to tight lndustr~a(l M6)Z one
Change in Zoning from Community Park (P2) Zone
Map Forming Part of to Conse~ationNazardL and (P5) Zone
By-Law No. 10- 128
to Amend By-law No.05-200
Scale: File NamdNumb er:l !!l
N T.S. CI-09-H 700 Woodward Ave
Date: PlannerlTechnician:
March 17, 2010 JUNB
Hamilton
PLANNINGAND ECONOMIC DEMLOPMENTDEPARTMENI
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 81 of 83
Schedule 8
This is Schedule "8"t o By-Law No. 10-128 - - - -
..w
Passed the 26th. ... day of ..............,2 010
auDjecr't-ToperrY
Schedule " 8
Change in Zoning horn Neighbourhood Institutional
(H) Zone to Light InduBiaI (MB) Zme
Change in Zoning horn Neighbourhood Institutional
Map Forming Part of (11) Zone to ConservationMazard Land (P5)Z one
By-Law No. 10-128
to Amend By-law No.05-200
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 82 of 83
Schedule 9
PlANNING IWD ECONDMlC
DNEWPMENT DEPARTMENT
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Industrial Zones
for the City of Hamilton
Page 83 of 83
Schedule 10
I IamiXton
" ,...,-,--,-w
PlAfIIIINGAlID ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT



Content from 10142 fence bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON BY-LAW 10-142
FENCE BY-LAW
Being a by-law to regulate fences and to repeal By-law No. 82-82 of the Town of
Ancaster, By-law No. 3823-89 of the Town of Dundas, By-law No. 96-27-F of the
Town of Flamborough and By-law No. 4054-94 of the City of Stoney Creek.
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-
laws listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience
only and is not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate reference to the By-law,
certified copies should be obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
THE FENCE BY-LAW
CITY OF HAMILTON
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 10-142
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-law No.: Effective Date: Report No:
10-315 December 15, 2010 10-001 (PED10084b)
11-230 September 28, 2011 11-016 (PED10063d)
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10- 142
Being a by-law to regulate fences and to repeal By-law No. 82-82 of the Town of Ancaster,
By-law No. 3823-89 of the Town of Dundas, By-law No. 96-27-F of the Town of
Flamborough and By-law No. 4054-94 of the City of Stoney Creek.
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 2 of 10
WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorize the City of Hamilton to pass
by-laws necessary or desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraph 10 of
subsection 10(2) authorizes by-laws respecting fences;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to pass
by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of Hamilton passed under
that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton, amongst other
things, to delegate its authority, to impose fees or charges on persons for services or activities
provided or done by or on behalf of it, to provide for inspections and inspection orders, and to
make orders to discontinue activity or to do work;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
SHORT TITLE
1. This By-law may be referred to as the “Fence By-law” or the “Hamilton Fence By- law”.
DEFINITIONS
2. In this By-law:
“building” means a structure, whether permanent or temporary, with walls or a roof or part
thereof, used or intended to be used for shelter, accommodation or enclosure of persons,
animals, goods or chattels;
“City” means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic area of the City of
Hamilton as the context requires;
"corner lot" means:
(a) lot situated at the intersection of two or more streets or a lot abutting on one or more
parts of the same street where such intersections have an angle of intersection of 135
degrees or less; or
(b) a lot located on the curve of a street where the angle of intersection of the projected
tangents of the street line does not exceed 135 degrees;
"corner visibility triangle" means a triangular area formed within a corner lot by the
intersecting street lines or the projections thereof and a straight line connecting them
5.4 m from their point of intersection;
"Director" means the City's Director of Municipal Law Enforcement and his or her designate
or successor;
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 3 of 10
"driveway visibility triangle" means a triangular area formed by the intersection of the
lateral limit of the travelled portion of the driveway and the street line or the projections
thereof and a straight line connect them 2.7m from their point of intersection;
"farm" means an agricultural operation as defined in the Farming and Food Production
Protection Act, 1998 and includes such an operation that is not carried on with the
expectation of gain but otherwise meets the definition in that Act;
"fence" includes:
(a) a railing, wall, line of posts, wire, gate, boards, pickets, latticework, or any combination
thereof, or other similar erection used for the purposes of enclosing or dividing in whole
or in part a lot, establishing a lot line or providing privacy; and
(b) a hedge or grouping of shrubs used for the purposes listed in subsection (a) located in
a corner visibility triangle or a driveway visibility triangle or within 3.0m of a street line,
but does not include:
(c) any vegetation, including a hedge or grouping of shrubs used for the purposes listed in
subsection (a), not located in a corner visibility triangle or a driveway visibility triangle
or within 3.0m of a street line; or
(d) a see-through screen erected to contain a recreational activity such as a chain-link
fence erected around a tennis court;
"height", unless otherwise defined in this By-law, means the vertical distance measured
between the finished ground adjacent to a fence and the highest point of the fence,
provided that where a fence is located on top of a retaining wall, "height" means the
vertical distance measured between the top of the retaining wall and the highest point of
the fence;
"lot" means a parcel of land which can be legally conveyed pursuant to the provisions of the
Planning Act;
"lot line" means the boundary of a lot including the vertical projection thereof;
"maintain" includes "have", "construct" or "repair";
"officer" means a person appointed by the City of Hamilton or assigned by the Director to
enforce this By-law;
"street" means a public highway or road allowance having a minimum width of 12.0m;
"street line" means any lot line that divides a lot from a street; and
"zone" means any land use zone established in the zoning by-laws of the City and passed
under the Planning Act or any predecessor or successor Act.
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 4 of 10
PROHIBITIONS
3. (1) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence that does not comply with the
provisions of this By-law.
(2) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence:
(a) exceeding a height of 2.0m on a lot in any zone or in the Niagara Escarpment
Development Area except on a lot:
i. in an industrial zone; or
ii. used as a farm;
(b) exceeding a height of 3.0m on a lot:
i. in an industrial zone; or
ii. used as a farm;
(c) located so as to obstruct a parking space required under the City's zoning by- laws; or
(d) exceeding a height of 0.9m and located within:
i. a corner visibility triangle or a driveway visibility triangle; or
ii. 3.0m of a front lot line.
(3) Despite subsection 2(a) but subject to subsections 2(c) and (d) a fence may be a
maximum of 2.4m in height, or where the fence is located on a deck or elevated platform,
2.0m in height measured vertically from the deck or elevated platform to the highest point
of the fence, provided that the fence is:
(a) located at least 1.2m from a side lot line, not including a side lot line where a
common or party wall is located;
(b) located at least 3.0m from a rear lot line; and
(c) no more than 4.5m in length
(d) in Ward 12, an extension to prevent deer from jumping over the fence may exceed
such a limit by a maximum of 0.4m, provided that:
i. the extension, not including support structure, is constructed of not more
than 4 horizontal lines of fencing wire or similar wire-like material; and
ii. each line of fencing wire or similar wire-like material is a maximum of 1cm in
diameter
[As Amended: By-law 10-315 s.1}
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 5 of 10
(4) Despite the limits on the height of a fence under subsections (2) and (3):
(a) a gate may exceed such a limit by a maximum of 0.3m;
(b) an archway forming an entrance to or exit may exceed such a limit by 0.4m;
(c) a decorative cap or structural post may exceed such a limit by a maximum of
0.15 m.
(5) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence comprised of sheet metal or
corrugated metal panels on a lot in a residential zone or in the Niagara Escarpment
Development Control Area.
(6) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence comprised of barbed wire,
except:
(a) for a fence on a farm for the keeping of livestock or the protection of livestock or
crops from animals;
(b) on the top of a fence on a lot used for commercial or industrial purposes, provided
that the barbed wire is a minimum of 2.0m above the adjacent finished ground and
projects inwards towards the area enclosed by the fence; or
(c) on the top of a fence erected for security reasons enclosing a facility owned or
operated by any level of government or a utility provider, provided that the barbed
wire is a minimum of 2.0m above the adjacent finished ground and projects inwards
towards the area enclosed by the fence.
(7) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence equipped to transmit an
electric current, except for a fence on a farm for the keeping of livestock or the protection
of livestock or crops from animals provided that the fence meets the requirements of any
applicable Canadian Standards Association Standard.
(8) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence on City property without the
prior permission of the City.
(9) No person shall maintain or permit to be maintained a fence that is hazardous to persons
or property.
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 6 of 10
EXISTING FENCES
4. (1) Despite the provisions of this By-law, a fence that was in existence prior to June 9, 2010
and was in compliance with the applicable fence regulations in force under other City
by-laws at the time the fence came into existence, shall be deemed to comply with this
By-:-law for so long as such fence continues to be the same height, length and width and
comprised of the same material.
(2) If fence regulations under other City by-laws applicable to a fence were:
(a) not in force at the time the fence came into existence; and
(b) in force before the time the fence came into existence, then this By-law applies to
the fence.
DIFFERENT TREATMENTS
5. (1) Despite any provision of this By-law, in the event of conflict between this By-law and:
(a) an agreement entered into with the City under sections 41 or 51 of the Planning Act
or any plan approved by the City, the agreement entered into with the City under
sections 41 or 51 of the Planning Act or any plan approved by the City prevails over
this By-law to the extent of the conflict;
(b) a City zoning By-law, the City zoning By-law prevails over this By-Law to the extent
of the conflict; or
(c) The Swimming Pool Enclosure By-law, The Swimming Pool Enclosure By-law
prevails over this By-law to the extent of the conflict,
but in all other respects, this By-law applies.
[As Amended: By-law 11-230 s.1}
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
6. (1) The Director is assigned the responsibility of administering and enforcing this By-law and
may so assign duties to such persons as necessary to carry out the provisions of this By-
law.
(2) Persons appointed or assigned for the purposes of administering or enforcing this By- law
are officers, have the authority to carry out the duties assigned to officers under this By-
law, and may enforce the provisions of this By-law.
(3) An officer may enter on a lot at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an
inspection to determine whether or not the following are being complied with:
(a) this By-law;
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 7 of 10
(b) a direction or order made under this By-law; or
(c) a prohibition order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
(4) An officer may, for the purposes of the inspection under subsection (3):
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the purpose
of making copies or extracts;
(c) require information in writing or otherwise as required by the officer from any
person concerning a matter related to the inspection; or
(d) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert knowledge,
make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs necessary for the purposes of
the inspection.
(5) Any cost incurred by the City in exercising its authority to inspect under paragraph (4)(d),
including but not limited to the cost of any examination, test, sample or photograph
necessary for the purposes of the inspection, shall be paid by the owner or occupant of
the lot where the inspection takes place.
(6) An officer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an order issued by a provincial judge
or justice of the peace under Section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001 where he or she has
been prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying out an inspection under
subsections 6(3) and 6(4).
(7) If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may
make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupant of the lot on which the
contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening activity.
(8) An order under subsection (7) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention
and the location of the lot on which the contravention occurred; and
(b) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
(9) If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may
make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupant of the lot on which the contravention
occurred to do work to correct the contravention.
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 8 of 10
(10) An order under subsection (9) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention
and the location of lot on which the contravention occurred;
(b) the work to be completed; and
(c) the date or dates by which the work must be completed.
(11) An order to discontinue contravening activity made under subsection (7) or an order to do
work made under subsection (9) may be served:
(a) by regular mail to the last known address of the owner or occupant of the lot where
the contravention occurred;
(b) by an officer placing a placard containing the order in a conspicuous place on the
lot where the contravention occurred; or
(c) personally on the owner or occupant of the lot where the contravention occurred.
(12) Where a person does not comply with a direction, an order or a requirement under this
By-law to do a matter or thing, the Director, with such assistance by others as may be
required, may carry out such direction, order or requirement at the person's expense.
(13) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection (12) by action
or by adding the costs to the tax roll and collecting them in the same manner as property
taxes and such costs shall include an interest rate of 15 per cent per year commencing
on the day the City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs, including the
interest, are paid in full.
(14) The Director is authorized to give immediate effect to any direction, order or requirement
where the costs of carrying out the direction, order or requirement do not exceed
$10,000 and, where the costs do exceed $10,000, as the City's Council may authorize.
(15) Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law or fails to comply with an
order made under this By-law is guilty of an offence and upon conviction is liable:
(a) on a first conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000; and
(b) on any subsequent conviction, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
[As Amended: By-law 11-230 s.2}
(16) Despite subsection (15), where the person convicted is a corporation:
(a) the maximum fine in paragraph (15)(a) is $50,000; and
(b) the maximum fine in paragraph (15)(b) is $100,000.
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 9 of 10
(17) Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction has
been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition to any
other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law, make an order prohibiting the
continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
TRANSITION, REPEAL, COMING INTO FORCE, ETC.
7. (1) All measurements in this By-law are given in the metric short form.
(2) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this By-law
invalid, it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to be
in force.
(3) All prosecutions and other enforcement processes commenced under By-law No. 82- · 82
of the Town of Ancaster, By-law No. 3823-89 of the Town of Dundas, By-law No. 96-27-F
of the Town of Flamborough and By-law No. 4054-94 of the City of Stoney Creek, which
have not been completed on the day this By-law comes into force shall be completed
under those By-laws as if they had not been repealed.
(4) By-law No. 82-82 of the Town of Ancaster, By-law No. 3823-89 of the Town of Dundas,
By-law No. 96-27-F of the Town of Flamborough and By-law No. 4054-94 of the City of
Stoney Creek are repealed as of the day this By-law comes into force.
(5) This By-law comes into force on the date of its passing.
ED this 9th day of June, 2010
isenberger
Mayor
Fence By-Law No. 10-142 Page 10 of 10



Content from 10171 to amend bylaw no 03020 to regulate noisepdf:
Authority: Item 6, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 10-012 (PED1 0115)
CM: June 9, 2010
Bil No. 171
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO.1 0-171
A By-Law amending By-law No. 03-020 to regulate Noise
WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton wishes to amend By-law No. 03-
020 to regulate noise;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 1 (3) of By-law No. 03-020 is amended by adding the
following new paragraph before paragraph (i):
(i.2) Director means the City's Director of Municipal Law
Enforcement and his or her designate or successor;
2. Subsection 12(3) of By-law No. 03-020 is deleted and the subsequent
subsection renumbered accordingly.
3. Section 15 of By-law No. 03-020 is deleted and replaced by the
following new section 15:
1 5( 1 ) Any person may apply for an exemption from this By-law or
any provision of it.
(2) An application for an exemption shall be made on the form
prescribed by the Director at least 60 days in advance and
shall be accompanied by the applicable fee as set out in the
City's User Fees and Charges By-law.
(3) Despite subsection (2), an application for an exemption may
be made less than 60 days in advance if it is accompanied
by the applicable late fee as set in City's User Fees and
Charges By-law.
Upon receipt of a completed application for an exemption,
(4)
the Director may:
A By-Law amending By-law No. 03-020 to regulate Noise
Page 2 of 3
(a) issue the exemption subject to such conditions as he
or she may determine; or
(b) refuse the exemption.
(5) In considering an application for an exemption, the Director
shall have regard to:
(a) any negative effects the issuance of the exemption
may have on neighbouring properties or on the City;
(b) any benefits the issuance of the exemption may have
on neighbouring properties or on the City;
(c) any previous violations of this By-law or an exemption
by the applicant; and
anything the Director considers relevant.
(d)
(6) The conditions that the Director may impose on an
exemption include but are not limited to:
(a) the type and volume of the sound that may be made;
the times during which sound may be made;
(b)
the period of time during which the exemption is in
(c)
effect;
(d) that a qualified individual or qualified individuals, as
determined by the Director, monitor the sound and file
a report with Director at the applicant's expense.
An applicant for an exemption may appeal the decision of
(7)
the Director within 10 days of the decision being made to the
Economic Development and Planning Committee.
An appeal shall be made on the form prescribed by the
(8)
Director.
(9) Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the Director shall notify
the applicant once an appeal date before the Economic
Development and Planning Committee has been set and if
the applicant does not attend on the appeal date, the
2
A By-Law amending By-law No. 03-020 to regulate Noise
Page 3 of 3
Committee may proceed in their absence and the applicant
shall not be entitled to further notice in the proceeding.
(10) Council may uphold or vary the recommendation or
recommendations of the Economic Development and
Planning Committee or do any act or make any decision it
might have done had it conducted the appeal itself and the
applicant shall not be entitled to a further hearing of the
appeal before CounciL. The decision of Council shall be
finaL.
(11) An exemption issued under this section expires upon a
breach of any of its conditions.
4. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 8th day of July, 2010.
~~~MÄ~
Mayor
3



Content from 10197 hamilton sign bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
HAMILTON SIGN BY-LAW
BY-LAW NO. 10-197
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending
by-laws listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of
convenience only and is not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate
reference to the By-law, certified copies should be obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
Page 2 of 35
CITY OF HAMILTON SIGN BY-LAW
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 10-197
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-Law No: Effective Date:
10-316 December 15, 2010 Technical and housekeeping amendment
11-230 September 28, 2011 Technical and housekeeping amendments
16-284 October 26, 2016 Amendments respecting Digital Billboards
17-026 February 28, 2017 Amendments to Section 3.4 – Existing
Signs
18-026 February 14, 2018 Amendments to Section 15.11.2(c)
branding signs (construction hoarding)
22-031 February 23, 2022
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 3 of 35
City of Hamilton Sign By-law 10-197
INDEX
DEFINITIONS ………………………..……………………………………………….…. 4
TITLE, SCOPE AND INTENT ……………………………………………………...….. 8
Title ……………………………………………………………………...... 8
Scope …………………………………………………………………….. 8
Intent ……………………………………………………………………… 9
INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION ………………………………….….. 9
Administration .………………………………………………………...... 10
Permits .………………………………………………………………….. 10
Sign Permit Refusal, Expiry or Renewal……………………………… 11
Existing Signs ………………………………………………………..…. 11
Refunds ……………………………………………………………….… 12
GENERAL PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS ………………………….….…. 12
REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR TYPES OF SIGNS …………….……….….. 13
Prohibited Signs ….…………………………………………………...... 13
Ground Signs, including Construction Information Ground Signs … 14
Wall Signs, including Projecting Signs .…………………………….… 16
Mobile Signs …………………………….………………………………. 17
Banners …………………………………………………………………. 19
Banners Temporary Signs, including Agricultural Produce
Portable Signs, Corrugated Plastic Type Signs, New Home
Development Signs and Sidewalk Signs ……………………….….… 20
Inflatable Signs …………………………………………………………. 22
Posters ………………………………………………………………..…. 23
Election Signs …………………………………………………………… 23
Billboards ………………………………………………………………… 25
Digital Billboards ………………………………………………………… 25
Other Signs …………………………..………...………………….……. 26
VARIANCES ………………………………………………………………..…….…….. 29
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT ………………………….……………….…….. 30
CONFLICT ……………………………………………………….…………….……….. 32
VALIDITY ……………………………………………………………………..………… 32
TRANSITION AND REPEAL…………………………………………..……………... 32
EFFECTIVE DATE …………………………………………………..………………… 33
CITY OF HAMILTON HAMILTON
SIGN BY-LAW
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 4 of 35
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 10-197, as Amended
A By-Law repealing and replacing By-law No. 06-243 respecting Signs within the
City of Hamilton
WHEREAS Council desires to pass a by-law respecting signs in the City of Hamilton;
AND WHEREAS Sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorize the City of
Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular
Paragraph 10 of Subsection 10(2) authorizes by-laws respecting signs;
AND WHEREAS subsection 8(3) of the Municipal Act, 2001 provides that a by- law under
section 10 of that Act respecting a matter may regulate or prohibit, may require a person to do
things, and may provide for a system of permits;
AND WHEREAS subsection 63(1) of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton,
if it passes a by-law for prohibiting or regulating the placing of an object on a highway, to
provide for the removal of any object placed on a highway in contravention of that bylaw;
AND WHEREAS Section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to
pass By-laws providing that a person who contravenes a By-law of the City of Hamilton
passed under that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton, amongst
other things, to delegate its authority, to impose fees or charges on persons for services or
activities provided or done by or on behalf of it, to provide for inspections and inspection
orders, and to make orders to discontinue activity or to do work;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
PART 1.0
DEFINITIONS
1.1 In this By-law:
“advertising device” means any object displayed so as to attract public attention to any
goods, services, facilities or events, including but not limited to flags, banners and lights;
“Agricultural Produce Portable Sign” means a Temporary Sign that is a freestanding sign
which is typically shaped like an “A” or a “T” with one or two sign faces that is intended to
direct attention to the sale of agricultural produce in an agricultural zone;
“Banner” means a sign that is temporary, is capable of being readily removed and is made
from cloth, plastic or a similar lightweight non-rigid material;
“Billboard” means a sign that is free standing and is supported by a structure secured to the
ground and which is not supported by any building or other structure, displays copy
advertising goods, products, or services not sold or offered on the property where the sign is
displayed and is either single faced or double faced but does not include a Digital Billboard
(16-284)
or Ground Sign;
“Business Improvement Area” means an area designated by the City as an improvement
area under the Municipal Act, 2001;
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 5 of 35
“charity” means a registered charity as defined in the Income Tax Act (Canada) or successor
legislation, which has a registration number issued by the Canada Revenue Agency, or
successor agency;
“Chief Building Official” means the person and/or his or her designate so appointed by
Council pursuant to the Building Code Act, 1992;
“City” means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic area of the City of
Hamilton, as the context requires;
“community organization” means a not for profit group of persons organized for the
advancement of a civic, cultural, social, health, philanthropic or recreational purpose within the
City;.
“Construction Information Ground Sign” means a Ground Sign that identifies or provides
information relating to or advertising a development or construction project;
“copy” means the graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent or changeable letter,
pictorial, symbolic, or numeric form;
“Corrugated Plastic Type Sign” means a Temporary Sign that is secured to a light standard
or other such structure with one or two sign faces and made of corplast or similar material;
“Council” means the Council of the City of Hamilton;
“Digital Billboard” means a sign that is free standing and is supported by a structure secured
to the ground and which is not supported by any building or other structure, displays copy
advertising goods, products or services not sold or offered on the property where the sign is
displayed by means of a digital or electronic screen and is either single faced or double faced,
but does not include a Billboard or Ground Sign;(16-284)
“Director” means the Senior Director of the Parking and By-law Enforcement Division of the
City’s Planning and Economic Development Department and/or his or her designate or
successor;
“display” in any form includes “erect” and “locate”;
“driveway line” means the line forming a boundary between that portion of a property not
normally used by vehicular traffic and the lateral limit of a driveway;
“electronic message display” means that part of a sign composed of electronically
controlled copy;
“frontage” means the length of the property line of any one property parallel to and along
each street;
“General Manager” means the General Manager of the City’s Planning and Economic
Development Department;
“grade” means the average surface elevation of the finished ground below a sign;
“Ground Sign” means a sign that is free standing and is supported by a structure secured to
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 6 of 35
the ground and which is not supported by any building or other structure but does not include
(16-284)
a Billboard or Digital Billboard;
“height” means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the grade
immediately below a sign to the highest point of the sign and includes any support structure or
ornamental feature;
“Inflatable Sign” means a sign that is temporary, is filled with air or gas and tethered to the
ground, a vehicle or any structure and includes, but is not limited to, balloons and any other
inflatable sign;
“Mobile Sign” means a sign that is temporary, is capable of being readily moved from one
location to another, and may be part of or attached to a wheeled trailer or frame without
wheels but does not include a Temporary Sign;
“New Home Development Portable Sign” means a Temporary Sign that is a freestanding
sign which is typically shaped like an “A” or a “T” with one or two sign faces that is intended to
direct attention to the sale of new home developments;
“officer” means a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer appointed under any City by-law or any
other person assigned or appointed by the Director to administer or enforce this By-law and
includes a person employed by the City whose duties are to enforce this By-law;
“owner of the property” means the registered owner of the property, or the person or the
person’s authorized agent in lawful control of a property;
“person” includes any individual, association, proprietorship, partnership, syndicate,
company, corporation, firm, business, authorized agent, trustee and the heirs, executors or
other legal representatives, or any combination of the foregoing;
“Poster” means a printed notice conveying any information intended to be displayed for a
temporary period of time and includes but is not limited to a bill, handbill, leaflet, notice or
placard;
“poster sleeve” means a collar or other protective covering or identifier fitted by the City to a
utility pole for the purpose of displaying Posters;
“Projecting Sign” means a Wall Sign that projects out horizontally from the wall more than 60
cm;
“property” means a parcel of land which can be legally conveyed pursuant to the provisions
of the Planning Act;
“property line” means the boundary of a property;
“readograph” means that part of a sign composed of changeable letters intended to convey a
temporary message and which is designed or constructed so that the copy on the sign may be
easily changed and rearranged mechanically not including electronically;
“Sidewalk Sign” means a Temporary Sign that is a free-standing sign which is typically
shaped like an “A” or a “T” with one or two sign faces;
“sign” means any surface, structure and other component parts, which are used or capable of
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 7 of 35
being used as a visual medium or display to attract attention to a specific subject matter for
identification, information or advertising purposes and includes an advertising device;
“sign area” means the entire area of the surface of a sign including the border or frame
where copy may be displayed and includes any material forming an integral part of the
background or used to differentiate the sign from the backdrop or building against which it is
displayed. Where there is no border or frame or the sign is composed of individually installed
letters, numerals or shapes, the sign area includes all of the area of the smallest polygon
containing a maximum of eight right angle sides that enclose the surface of the sign or the
grouping of letters, numerals or shapes;
“sign kiosk” means a kiosk erected by the City in a Business Improvement Area for the
purpose of displaying Posters;
“sign owner” includes any person described on the sign, whose name, address or telephone
number appears on the sign, who installed the sign, who owns the property where the sign is
displayed, or who benefits from the message on the sign, and for the purposes of this
definition, there may be more than one sign owner;
“street” means any public highway but does not include a provincial highway;
“street furniture” means all street related amenities and includes benches, kiosks, telephone
booths, newspaper boxes, mail boxes, clocks, street lighting, transit shelters, litter containers,
clothing recycling collection boxes, bicycle racks, tree guards, planters and other similar
privately or publicly owned features;
“street line” means a property line that divides a property from a street;
“Temporary Sign“ means an Agricultural Produce Portable Sign, Corrugated Plastic Type
Sign, New Home Development Portable Sign or Sidewalk Sign but does not include a Mobile
Sign;
“use” when used in conjunction with the words zone, residential, employment, industrial,
commercial, institutional, agricultural, open space, or similar words, shall mean such uses as
may be permitted under the zoning by-laws of the City;
“vacant” means a property separately assessed that does not have any building or any
occupied building thereon;
“visibility triangle” means the triangular area formed within a property by the intersection of
2 street lines or of a street line and a driveway line or the projections thereof and a straight line
connecting them 6.0 m from their point of intersection, as shown in Schedule A;
“Wall Sign” means a sign displayed on or against a wall of a building, or supported by or
through a wall of a building;
“width” means the measurement taken at right angles to the height;
“zone” means any land use zone established in the zoning by-laws of the City and passed
under the Planning Act or any predecessor or successor Act.
PART 2.0
TITLE, SCOPE AND INTENT OF SIGN BY-LAW
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 8 of 35
2.1 TITLE
This By-law may be cited as the “Hamilton Sign By-law” or the “Sign By-law”.
2.2 SCOPE
2.2.1 This By-law regulates the location, size, number, construction, alteration, repair and
maintenance of all outdoor signs within the City.
2.2.2 All signs located on public and private property within the City are subject to the
provisions of this By-law.
2.2.3 Signs located within the City may be subject to the provisions of by-laws in addition to
this By-law, statutes or regulations, including, but not limited to: the provisions Ontario
Heritage Act requiring a permit for the alteration of designated properties or properties
located in a heritage conservation district; provisions of the City’s zoning by-laws such
as those prohibiting signs in required landscaped areas or planting strips; and
Conservation Authority or Niagara Escarpment Commission requirements.
2.2.4 This By-law does not apply to signs displayed, or permitted to be displayed by federal,
provincial or municipal governments, a conservation authority or other local board as
defined in the Municipal Act, 2001, including, but not limited to, signs required by a
federal or provincial statute or regulation or by a municipal by-law, such as: a traffic
sign; a street name sign; a permanent sign displayed on a street to inform the public of
the location of Business Improvement Areas, public buildings, hospitals, public
libraries, institutions, places of worship, parks, recreational or educational facilities; a
sign designating a public library, a public community centre, a public arena; a sign
required by the City to inform the public of planning applications submitted under the
Planning Act; a Tourism Ontario Destination sign; a Trailblazer sign and a sign
displayed for the purposes of public safety or convenience.
2.2.5 Notwithstanding subsection 2.2.4, the applicable regulations under this By-law shall
apply with necessary modifications for signs on City property that function as Ground
Signs, Wall Signs or Projecting Signs and no permit is required under this By-law for
such signs.
2.2.6 Notwithstanding subsection 2.2.4, the applicable regulations under this By-law shall
apply with necessary modifications for signs displayed under a permit issued in
accordance with section 34 or section 38 of the Public Transportation and Highway
Improvement Act and a permit is required under this By-law for such signs.
2.3 INTENT
The purpose of this By-law is to regulate signs in the City with the intent of authorizing signs
that:
(a) are appropriate in size, number, and location to the type of activity or use to which
they pertain;
(b) provide reasonable and appropriate means for the public to locate and identify
facilities, businesses, and services without difficulty or confusion;
(c) are compatible with their surroundings;
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 9 of 35
(d) protect and enhance the aesthetic qualities and visual character of the City;
(e) are consistent with the City’s planning, urban design and heritage objectives;
(f) do not create a distraction or safety hazard for pedestrians or motorists;
(g) minimize adverse impacts on nearby public and private property.
PART 3.0
INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION
3.1 ADMINISTRATION
3.1.1 The Director shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of this By-law
on all public and private property within the City.
3.1.2 The Director or an officer may enter upon any property at any reasonable time to
inspect a sign for the purpose of determining or affecting its compliance with this By-
law.
3.2 PERMITS
3.2.1 Every person displaying:
(a) a Ground Sign;
(b) a Wall Sign;
(c) a Mobile Sign;
(d) a Banner, except for a Banner advertising a charity’s or community organization’s
2
activities or with a sign area of less than 1 m ;
(e) a Temporary Sign, except a Sidewalk Sign on private property;
(f) an Inflatable Sign;
(g) a Billboard,
(16-284)
(h) a Digital Billboard;
within the City shall apply for and obtain a permit before displaying their sign.
3.2.2 Every person applying for a sign permit shall provide to the Director or, where a
building permit is required, the Chief Building Official with:
(a) a completed application form as prescribed by the City;
(b) all plans, drawings and other materials as required by the City;
(c) all applicable permit fees as set out in the City’s User Fees and Charges By-law;
(d) the written authorisation of the owner of the property where the person applying for the
sign permit is not also the owner of the property where the sign will be displayed; and
(e) where applicable, proof of approval for the proposed sign from all governmental
authorities having jurisdiction.
3.2.3 An application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by plans and drawings that
contain the following information:
(a) a key map showing the location of the property on which the proposed sign is to be
located and the nearest major street intersection;
(b) a location plan showing the property where the sign is to be displayed, drawn to scale
showing the dimensions of all property lines, existing or proposed buildings, location of
proposed signs, and location of all existing signs on the same property;
(c) drawings and specifications of the sign drawn to scale and showing sections and
elevations of the sign to be displayed, construction details, supporting framework,
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 10 of 35
foundations, materials, illumination details, height of sign, sign area, length and width
of sign; and
(d) sufficient information for the Chief Building Official to determine that the sign has been
designed and will be constructed in compliance with the applicable structural
provisions of the Ontario Building Code.
3.2.4 No person shall alter a sign for which a sign permit has been obtained without the prior
written permission of the Director and, where a building permit also has been obtained,
the prior written permission of the Chief Building Official. Such permission may be
conditional on a new sign permit or building permit or both being applied for and
(10-316)
obtained.
3.3 SIGN PERMIT REFUSAL, EXPIRY, OR RENEWAL
3.3.1 a permit may be refused:
(a) if the proposed sign does not comply with this By-law, any other By-law or federal or
provincial statute or regulation; or
(b) where the proposed sign is to be displayed on private property, if any other sign
displayed on the property does not comply with this By-law.
(16-284)
3.3.2 A Billboard, Digital Billboard, Ground Sign or Wall Sign permit issued by the
City shall expire 6 months from the date of issuance unless the sign is displayed for its
intended purpose and a permit shall expire upon the removal of the sign.
(16-284)
3.3.3 Where a Billboard, Digital Billboard, Ground Sign or Wall Sign permit has
been issued and before it has expired, an application may be made to extend the
permit for a further 6 months, provided the sign continues to conform to all By-law
requirements and federal or provincial statutory or regulatory requirements existing at
the time of renewal.
3.3.4 The Director may revoke a permit under the following circumstances:
(a) the permit was issued in error;
(b) the sign does not comply with this By-law or any other by-law, the Ontario Building
Code, the Ontario Heritage Act or any federal or provincial statute or regulation;
(c) the permit was issued as the result of false, mistaken, incorrect, or misleading
statements, information, or undertakings on the application;
(d) the display of the sign has not commenced within 6 months after the issuance of the
permit;
(e) the display of the sign, in the opinion of the Director, has been substantially
suspended or discontinued for a period of more than 1 calendar year;
(f) the permit holder requests in writing that the permit be revoked; or
(g) the business, product, activity or service to which the sign relates ceases to operate or
is no longer available.
3.4 EXISTING SIGNS(17-026)
3.4.1 Any sign that is lawfully displayed on the day this By-law comes into force may
continue to be displayed provided it is not substantially altered in a manner that would
bring it into non-compliance or increase its non-compliance with this By-law.
3.4.2 Anything done to preserve the condition of a sign or to prevent the deterioration of a sign,
including the restoration of a sign by removing or replacing worn out, missing,
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 11 of 35
damaged or broken parts, or a change in the message or copy displayed by the sign is
not a substantial alteration.
3.4.3(1) Anything done to a Ground Sign or Wall Sign, other than anything done under
subsection 3.4.2, that does not change the dimensions of the sign or the location of
the sign on the property is not a substantial alteration, provided that:
(a) a sign permit is obtained; and
(b) in all other respects the Ground Sign or Wall Sign complies with this By-law.
(2) In addition to any other conditions contained in a sign permit issued under paragraph
3.4.3(1), the Director may include one or more conditions that improve and/or ensure
the safety of the Ground Sign or Wall Sign, including but not limited to a condition that
the sign not obstruct the view of pedestrians, cyclists or drivers.
3.5 REFUNDS
3.5.1 Subject to subsections 3.5.2 and 3.5.3, the Director shall determine the amount of the
fees, if any, that may be refunded in accordance with the City’s User Fees and Charges By-
law where:
(a) the sign permit applicant requests in writing that the sign permit application be
cancelled;
(b) the Director refuses to issue the sign permit because the sign does not comply with
this By-law or any other by-law, the Ontario Building Code, the Ontario Heritage Act or
any federal or provincial statute or regulation; or
(c) the permit was issued in error.
3.5.2 There shall be no refund where:
(a) the permit was issued as the result of false, mistaken, incorrect, or misleading
statements, information, or undertakings on the application; or
(b) the sign, for which the permit application is made, has been displayed prior to the
issuance of a permit.
3.5.3 Refunds shall only be provided for Ground Sign and Wall Sign permit applications.
PART 4.0
GENERAL PROHIBITIONS AND REGULATIONS
4.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a sign:
(a) for which a permit has not been obtained, if a permit is required under this By-law;
(b) which is not in compliance with this By-law or the conditions of any variance granted
under this By-law;
(c) which is not specifically permitted under this By-law;
(d) which is on City property except:
(i) a Poster as permitted by this By-law; or (22-031)
(ii) with the permission of the City;
(e) which is on property without the permission of the owner of the property;
(f) which obstructs the view of any pedestrian or driver of a vehicle, obstructs the visibility
of any traffic signal or traffic control device, or interferes with vehicular traffic in a
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 12 of 35
manner that could endanger any person;
(g) which is on any traffic signal or traffic control device;
(h) which illuminates any adjacent property or the path of vehicular traffic;
(i) which is not maintained in a proper state of repair, becomes unsightly, becomes
structurally inadequate or faulty, or could be hazardous to a pedestrian or motorist;
(j) which the Director has directed be removed;
(k) which bears or displays the City logo, crest or seal in whole or in part, without the
express written permission of the City; or
(l) which does not comply with all applicable by-laws, statutes or regulations including,
but not limited to, the Ontario Heritage Act.
4.2 A person shall be deemed to be displaying a sign if that person is the sign owner and
fails to stop the display of the sign.
PART 5.0
REGULATIONS FOR PARTICULAR TYPES OF SIGNS
5.1 PROHIBITED SIGNS
5.1.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed:
(a) any sign with a video screen or any flashing, kinetic, or illusionary motion, except an
electronic message display as permitted under this By-law;
(b) any sign supported entirely or partly by the roof of a building or structure and which
projects above the roof;
(c) any sign displayed within a visibility triangle;
(d) any sign displayed on a vehicle, trailer or truck which is parked or located on property
in a manner that is unrelated to its normal use as a vehicle and is more consistent with
the use of the vehicle as a sign;
(e) any sign which obstructs or is displayed in a parking space required under the City’s
zoning by-laws; or
(f) any sign within 400.0 m of the right of way of Highway 403, the Queen Elizabeth Way,
the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway or the Red Hill Valley Parkway that is visible from
(10-316)
the travelled portion of the right of way except as otherwise permitted under
(16-284)
this By-law;
5.1.2 Where a sign is not expressly permitted by this By-law, it shall be deemed to be
prohibited.
5.1.3 Where a type of sign is not specifically permitted within a particular zone or on a
property with a particular zoned use, it shall be deemed to be prohibited within that
zone or on that property.
5.1.4 Notwithstanding subsections 5.1.2 and 5.1.3 and subject to the approval of Council,
signs on street furniture displayed pursuant to an agreement with the City are
permitted.
5.2 GROUND SIGNS INCLUDING CONSTRUCTION INFORMATION GROUND SIGNS
5.2.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Ground Sign except in accordance
with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 13 of 35
under this section of the By-law.
5.2.2 No Ground Sign shall be displayed except in accordance with the following
regulations:
permit / timing
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law;
(b) for a Construction Information Ground Sign, displayed after any applicable approval
for the construction or development project under the Planning Act has been given;
(c) for a Construction Information Ground Sign, maximum display period of not more than
28 days after construction or development is completed;
structure
(d) embedded in a foundation in the ground to a depth of at least 1.2 metres or secured in
an alternative manner that is satisfactory to the Chief Building Official;
2
(e) maximum sign area of 0.3 m for every 1.0 m of the frontage along which the Ground
2
Sign is located, not to exceed a total sign area of 18.0 m for a single- faced Ground
2
Sign or 36.0 m for a double or multi-faced Ground Sign;
(f) maximum height of 7.5 m;
content
(g) for a Ground Sign, except a Construction Information Ground Sign:
(i) includes the municipal address number of the property on which the Ground
Sign is displayed shown at the top or the bottom in numerals that are a
minimum height of 15.0 cm;
(ii) includes one or more of the following in copy that is a minimum height of 15.0
cm:
1. the name of the business;
2. the registered trademark of the business;
3. the ownership of the business; or
4. the name of the activity, product or service available;
(iii) and except a Ground Sign displayed on a property used for an institutional
use, may allocate a maximum 50% of the sign face to a readograph or
electronic message display provided that no copy displayed on an electronic
message display shall be displayed for less than three seconds, during which
there shall be no movement or change in colour or intensity of illumination;
(iv) displayed on a property used for an institutional use, may allocate a maximum
75% of the sign face to a readograph or electronic message display provided
that no copy displayed on an electronic message display shall be displayed for
less than three seconds, during which there shall be no movement or change
in colour or intensity of illumination;
(v) may advertise a business on the property on which the Ground Sign is
displayed or an activity, product or service available on that property, or a
charity’s or community organization’s activities;
(vi) for a Ground Sign that is not within the Downtown Community Improvement
Project Area, a Business Improvement Area, the Ancaster Village Core Area,
or within the Glanbrook Village Core Area, may allocate a maximum 25% of
2
the sign area or 1.2 m , whichever is lesser, except for an electronic message
display, to advertising a business that is not on the property on which the
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 14 of 35
Ground Sign is displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available
on that property;
(vii) for a Ground Sign that is within the Downtown Community Improvement
Project Area, a Business Improvement Area, the Ancaster Village Core
Area, or within the Glanbrook Village Core Area not advertising a business
that is not on the property on which the Ground Sign is displayed or an activity,
product or service that is not available on that property;
location
(h) not within 15.0 m of a traffic signal or traffic control device;
(i) not within 1.5 m or a distance equal to 75% of the height of the Ground Sign,
whichever is greater, of any property line;
(j) along the same frontage used to calculate the maximum sign area;
(k) where more than 1 Ground Sign is displayed along a frontage, not displayed within
200 m of another Ground Sign along the same frontage
(l) notwithstanding (k):
(i) 1 Construction Information Ground Sign;
(ii) 1 Ground Sign which provides courtesy or directional information only, such
as a menu board or clearance sign;
(iii) or both,
(10-316)
are permitted;
(m) for a Construction Information Ground Sign, maximum of 2 for any single development
or construction project;
(n) for a Ground Sign, except a Construction Information Ground Sign, permitted in all
zones except where the use of the property is for one or more of the following uses:
(i) a Single Detached Dwelling;
(ii) a Semi Detached Dwelling;
(iii) a Duplex;
(iv) a Triplex;
(v) a Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(vi) a Street Townhouse;
(vii) a Mobile Home;
(viii) a Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(ix) a Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(x) a Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(xi) an Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.2.3 No person shall display a Ground Sign on a property that ceases to be vacant or
undeveloped and where any Billboard displayed on the property has not been
removed.
5.3 WALL SIGNS INCLUDING PROJECTING SIGNS
5.3.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Wall Sign except in accordance
with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations
under this section of the By-law.
5.3.2 No Wall Sign shall be displayed except in accordance with the following regulations:
permit
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 15 of 35
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law;
structure
(b) not extend beyond the sides or top of the wall on which the Wall Sign is displayed;
(c) maximum sign area of 15% of the wall to which the Wall Sign is attached;
(d) where on a wall above a location where the public passes, not less than
2.8 metres above the grade below;
content
(e) for a Projecting Sign, maximum area of copy of 20% of its sign area except the
2
maximum area of the copy on a Projecting Sign that has a sign area of 1.0 m or less
may be 100% of its sign area;
(f) for a Wall Sign, except a Projecting Sign, a maximum of 50% of the sign area may be
a readograph or electronic message display provided that no copy displayed on an
electronic message display shall be displayed for less than three seconds, during
which there shall be no movement or change in colour or intensity of illumination;
(g) may advertise a business on the property on which the Wall Sign is displayed or an
activity, product or service available on that property, or a charity’s or community
organization’s activities;
(h) for a Wall Sign that is not within the Downtown Community Improvement Project Area,
a Business Improvement Area, the Ancaster Village Core Area, or within the
Glanbrook Village Core Area, may allocate a maximum 25% of the sign area or 1.2
2
m , whichever is less, except for an electronic message display, to advertising a
business that is not on the property on which the Wall Sign is displayed or an activity,
product or service that is not available on that property;
(i) for a Wall Sign that is within the Downtown Community Improvement Project Area, a
Business Improvement Area, the Ancaster Village Core Area, or within the Glanbrook
Village Core Area not advertising a business that is not on the property on which the
Wall Sign is displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available on that
property;
location
(j) where overhanging a public right of way under the jurisdiction of the City, the owner of
the property shall enter into an encroachment agreement with the City and shall
satisfy the City’s requirements for liability insurance;
(k) on the same building wall used to calculate the maximum sign area;
(l) permitted in all zones except where the use of the property is for one or more of the
following uses:
(i) a Single Detached Dwelling;
(ii) a Semi Detached Dwelling;
(iii) a Duplex;
(iv) a Triplex;
(v) a Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(vi) a Street Townhouse;
(vii) a Mobile Home;
(viii) a Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(ix) a Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 16 of 35
(x) a Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(xi) an Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.4 MOBILE SIGNS
5.4.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Mobile Sign except in accordance
with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations
under this section of the By-law.
5.4.2 No Mobile Sign shall be displayed except in accordance with the following regulations:
permit / timing
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law;
(b) submit an application for a permit no earlier than 28 days prior to the date the permit
comes into effect;
(c) applications for permits will be processed by the City in the order of receipt, and in the
event that applications are submitted simultaneously and insufficient opportunities
exist for the display of a Mobile Sign, priority for a permit shall be established by
means of a draw conducted by the Director;
(d) maximum display period of 28 consecutive days, being 2 permit periods of 14 days
each;
(e) minimum of 14 consecutive days after a display period ends before another permit
may be issued on a property;
(f) maximum of 6 permits issued for a single business on a property for a total calendar
year allotment of 84 days;
structure
2
(g) maximum sign area of 4.5 m per sign face for a commercial or industrial use;
(h) maximum height of 2.7 m and maximum width of 2.5 m;
content
(i) not illuminated;
(j) sign area may not be an electronic message display;
(k) display the name and telephone number of the sign owner in a clearly visible location;
(l) may advertise a business on the property on which the Mobile Sign is displayed or an
activity, product or service available on that property, or a charity’s or community
organization’s activities;
(m) not advertising a business that is not on the property on which the Mobile Sign is
displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available on that property;
location
(n) in a location approved in advance by the Director;
(o) not within:
(i) 15.0 m of an intersection or traffic signal or traffic control device;
(ii) 3.0 m of a driveway line;
(iii) 15.0 m of a side property line abutting a property with a residential use or 3.0
m of a side property line abutting a property with any other use;
(iv) 1.5 m of a street line; or
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 17 of 35
(v) any parking space required under the zoning by-laws of the City;
(p) not on a vacant property;
(q) no more than 2 Mobile Signs, separated by a distance of at least 50.0 metres, on a
property at any one time;
(r) permitted in all zones except where the use of the property is for one or more of the
following uses:
(i) a Single Detached Dwelling;
(ii) a Semi Detached Dwelling;
(iii) a Duplex;
(iv) a Triplex;
(v) a Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(vi) a Street Townhouse;
(vii) a Mobile Home;
(viii) a Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(ix) a Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(x) a Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(xi) an Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents;
provided that no Mobile Sign shall be displayed on a property within the Downtown
Community Improvement Project Area, a Business Improve-ment Area, the Ancaster
Village Core Area, or within the Glanbrook Village Core Area.
5.5 BANNERS
5.5.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Banner except in accordance with
the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations
under this section of the By-law.
5.5.2 No Banner shall be displayed except in accordance with the following regulations:
permit / timing
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law, except for a Banner with a maximum sign area of
2
less than 1 m or advertising a charity’s or community organization’s activities;
(b) no more than 1 permit issued for a single business at a single property in a calendar
year, provided that one additional permit may be issued if the Director is satisfied that
a business opening or closing event will be advertised;
(c) maximum display period of 28 consecutive days, being one permit period;
structure
(d) securely attached to a single building, structure or fence or in an alterna- tive manner
that is satisfactory to the Chief Building Official;
2
(e) maximum sign area of 6.0 m in sign area;
content
(f) where on private property:
(i) may advertise a business on the property on which the Banner is displayed, an
activity, product or service available on that property, or a charity’s or
community organization’s activities; and
(ii) not advertising a business that is not on the property on which the Banner is
displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available on that property;
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 18 of 35
(g) where on a street:
(i) may advertise a business adjacent to the property on which the Banner is
displayed, an activity, product or service available on that property, or a
charity’s or community organization’s activities; and
(ii) not advertising a business that is not adjacent the property on which the
Banner is displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available on
that property;
location
(h) not on a boundary fence, except a boundary fence between a property and a street;
(i) a maximum of 1 on each building elevation, structure or fence;
(j) permitted in all zones except where the use of the property is for one or more of the
following uses:
(i) a Single Detached Dwelling;
(ii) a Semi Detached Dwelling;
(iii) a Duplex;
(iv) a Triplex;
(v) a Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(vi) a Street Townhouse;
(vii) a Mobile Home;
(viii) a Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(ix) a Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(x) a Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(xi) an Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
5.6 BANNERS TEMPORARY SIGNS, INCLUDING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCE
PORTABLE SIGNS, CORRUGATED PLATIC TYPE SIGNS, NEW HOME
DEVELOPMENT SIGNS AND SIDEWALK SIGNS
5.6.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Temporary Sign except in
accordance with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific
regulations under this section of the By-law.
5.6.2 No Temporary Sign shall be displayed except in accordance with the following
regulations:
permit / timing
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law, except for a Sidewalk Sign on private property or an
Agricultural Produce Portable Sign;
(b) for a Corrugated Plastic Type Sign, maximum display period of 1 year, being one
permit period;
(c) for a New Home Development Portable Sign:
(i) no more than 10 permits issued at any one time advertising the sale of homes
in a single development; and
(ii) a permit period of 1 year with a maximum display period of no earlier than
noon on any Friday and no later than noon of the following Monday, provided
that:
1. where a statutory holiday falls on a Friday, the maximum display period
begins no earlier than noon on the preceding Thursday; and
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 19 of 35
2. where a statutory holiday falls on a Monday, the maximum display
period ends no later than noon on the following Tuesday;
(d) for a Sidewalk Sign, except for a Sidewalk Sign on private property, maximum display
period of 1 year or 3 years, being one permit period respectively;
structure
(e) for a Temporary Sign, except a Corrugated Plastic Type Sign:
(i) not permanently secured to the ground, any structure or tree
2
(ii) maximum sign area of 0.48 m for each sign face; and
(iii) maximum height of 0.8 m
2
(f) for a Corrugated Plastic Type Sign a maximum sign area of 2.2 m for each sign face;
content
(g) not illuminated;
(h) sign area may not be an electronic message display;
(i) for a Corrugated Plastic Type Sign and a Sidewalk Sign on private property:
(i) may advertise a business on the property on which the Corrugated Plastic
Type Sign or Sidewalk Sign is displayed, an activity, product or service
available on that property, or a charity’s or community organization’s activities;
and
(ii) not advertising a business that is not on the property on which the Corrugated
Plastic Type Sign or Sidewalk Sign is displayed or an activity, product or
service that is not available on that property;
(j) for a Sidewalk Sign on the street:
(i) may advertise a business adjacent to the property on which the Sidewalk Sign
is displayed, an activity, product or service available on that property, or a
charity’s or community organization’s activities; and
(ii) not advertising a business that is not adjacent to the property on which the
Sidewalk Sign is displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available
on that property;
location
(k) for an Agricultural Produce Portable Sign and a New Home Development Portable
Sign:
(i) not on private property;
(ii) not obstructing any permanent sign;
(iii) not on a traffic island or median or attached to a light standard or utility pole;
(iv) not on a public sidewalk;
(v) not less than 3.0 m from a driveway line;
(vi) not less than 1.5 m from the curb or edge of the travelled portion of a street
where there is no curb;
(vii) only on the untravelled portion of a street;
(viii) maximum of 3 on any one corner of an intersection with no farmer or builder
respectively having more than 1;
(ix) satisfying the City’s requirements, if any, for liability insurance.
(l) for a Corrugated Plastic Type Sign:
(i) on private property;
(ii) not within:
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 20 of 35
1. 15.0 m of an intersection or traffic signal or traffic control device;
2. 3.0 m of a driveway line;
3. 15.0 m of a side property line abutting a property with a residential use
or 3.0 m of a side property line abutting a property with any other use;
4. 1.5 m of a street line; or
5. any parking space required under the zoning by-laws of the City;
(iii) not on a vacant property;
(iv) separated by a distance of at least 10.0 metres for any other Corrugated
Plastic Type Sign;
(m) for a Sidewalk Sign:
(i) where displayed on private property, as close as possible to the front wall of
the advertised business;
(ii) no more than 1 for each business advertised;
(iii) where displayed on public property:
1. on a sidewalk or on the boulevard between the sidewalk and the
travelled portion of a street within the Downtown Community
Improvement Project Area, a Business Improvement Area, the
Ancaster Village Core Area, or within the Glanbrook Village Core Area;
2. adjacent to the curb opposite or against the front wall of the advertised
business provided there is a minimum 1.5 metres of unobstructed
sidewalk and no encroachment on any Urban Braille System;
3. only during the hours of operation of the advertised business;
4. satisfying the City’s requirements for liability insurance;
5.7 INFLATABLE SIGNS
5.7.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed an Inflatable Sign except in
accordance with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific
regulations under this section of the By-law.
5.7.2 No Inflatable Sign shall be displayed except in accordance with the following
regulations:
permit / timing
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law, except for an Inflatable Sign advertising a charity’s
or community organization’s activities;
(b) no more than 2 permits issued for a single business at a single property in a calendar
year, provided that one additional permit may be issued if the Director is satisfied that
a business opening or closing event will be advertised;
(c) maximum display period of 14 consecutive days, being 2 permit periods of 7 days
each;
structure
(d) secured in a manner that is satisfactory to the Director;
(e) maximum height of 7.0 m and maximum width of 6.0 m;
content
(f) may advertise a business on the property on which the Inflatable Sign is displayed, an
activity, product or service available on that property, or a charity’s or community
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 21 of 35
organization’s activities;
(g) not advertising a business that is not on the property on which the Inflatable Sign is
displayed or an activity, product or service that is not available on that property;
location
(h) not less than 5 m from any property line
(i) permitted only in commercial, industrial and institutional zones.
5.8 POSTERS
5.8.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Poster except in accordance with
the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations
under this section of the By-law.
5.8.2 No Poster shall be displayed except in accordance with the following regulations:
permit / timing
(a) no permit required;
(b) maximum display period of 21 days and not more than 3 days after the event or other
activity the Poster advertises;
structure
(c) affixed only by tape covering no more than 20% of the Poster’s sign area;
(d) consisting entirely of biodegradable material;
2
(e) maximum sign area of 0.13 m ;
location
(f) on public property, a maximum of 1 Poster advertising the same event or other activity:
(i) on a sign kiosk;
(ii) on a poster sleeve;
(iii) on a utility pole, a minimum of 200 m from any other utility pole displaying a
Poster advertising the same event or other activity, sign kiosk or poster sleeve;
(g) on private property:
2
(i) within a single maximum display area of 2.2 m ; and
(ii) a minimum of 200 m from any other display area permitted under paragraph
g(i).
5.8.3 Notwithstanding any other provision of this Bylaw, the City may remove and dispose of
Posters without notice or compensation to any person.
5.9 ELECTION SIGNS(22-031)
5.9.1 The Regulations pertaining to Election Signs shall be as set forth in Schedule 1 of this
By-law.
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 22 of 35
5.10 BILLBOARDS
5.10.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Billboard except in accordance
with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the specific regulations
under this section of the By-law.
5.10.2 No Billboard shall be displayed except in accordance with the following regulations:
permit
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law;
structure
2
(b) maximum sign area of 18.0 m ;
(c) maximum height of 12.0 m and maximum width of 4.0 m;
content
(d) not animated, except a Tri-Vision Billboard;
(e) may allocate a maximum 50% of the sign face to a readograph;
location
(f) not on a property within the Downtown Community Improvement Project Area, the
Waterdown Urban Area or the Waterdown Settlement Areas;
(g) not less than 300.0 m from another Billboard;
(h) not less than 300.0 m from any residentially zoned property;
(i) not less than 15.0 m from any property line;
(j) on vacant, undeveloped property zoned commercial or industrial.
5.10.3 Where a property on which a Billboard is displayed ceases to be vacant or
undeveloped, the sign owner shall remove the Billboard from the property.
(16-284)
5.10A DIGITAL BILLBOARDS
5.10A.1 No person shall display or permit to be displayed a Digital Billboard except in
accordance with the applicable general regulations under this By-law, and the
specific regulations under this section of the By-law.
5.10 A.2 No Billboard shall be displayed except in accordance with the following regulations:
permit
(a) obtain a permit under this By-law;
structure
(b) if the Digital Billboard is single faced or double faced (configured back-to- back or in a
“V” shape):
2
(i) a maximum sign area of 18.6 m for each sign face;
(ii) a maximum height of 6.1 m for each sign face; and
(iii) A maximum width of 10 m, except for a maximum width of 12 m for Digital
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 23 of 35
Billboards facing the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway;
(c) despite paragraph 5.10A.2(b), if the Digital Billboard is single faced and facing the
Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway:
2
(i) a maximum sign area of 36.2 m ;
(ii) a maximum height of 10.7 m; and
(iii) a maximum width of 12 m;
structure
2
(d) a maximum luminosity level of 300 candelas per m at night and 6000 candelas per
2
m during the day;
(e) equipped with a monitoring device to ensure that the light generated does not exceed
0.3 candles above ambient light levels at a distance of:
2
(i) 41 m for Digital Billboards with a sign area of not more than 18.6 m ;
2
(ii) 51 m for Digital Billboards with a sig area of more than 18.6 m but not more
2
than 28 m ; and;
2
(iii) 76 m for Digital Billboards with a maximum sign area of more than 28 m but
2
not more than 32.6 m ;
(f) not operate between the hours of 12 a.m. and 6 a.m.;
(g) minimum dwell time of 6 seconds; and
(h) maximum transition time of 1 second.
location
(i) not on a property within the Downtown Community Improvement Project Area, the
Waterdown Urban Area or the Waterdown Settlement Area;
(j) may be within 400 m of and visible from the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway;
(k) not less than 300 m from another Digital Billboard, provided that, to allow for viewing
from both sides of a street, the two sides of a double-sided Digital Billboard may be
separated by a maximum of 180 m when facing the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway and
by a maximum of 40 m when facing any other street;
(l) (i) not less than 300m from any residentially zoned property; or
(ii) less than 300 m from any residentially-zoned property if the Director is satisfied by
means of a viewshed analysis that includes consideration of sign alignment,
shielding and other means, that there is sufficient mitigation of the impact on
residential uses within 300 m;
(m) not less than 3.5 m from any property line;
(n) not less than 30 m from an intersection provided that an intersection does not include
an on or off- ramp to or from the Lincoln M. Alexander Parkway.(16-284)
5.11 OTHER SIGNS
5.11.1 No permit is required for the signs under subsection 5.11.2.
5.11.2 No person shall display or permit to be displayed:
agricultural sign
(a) a sign, including but not limited to a banner, associated with an agricultural use except:
2
(i) with a maximum sign area of 3.0 m ; and
(ii) in an agricultural zone;
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 24 of 35
agricultural society sign
(b) a sign displayed by a non-profit agricultural society for an event or fair the society
operates except:
2
(i) with a maximum sign area of 9.0 m ; and
(ii) in an agricultural zone;
branding sign (18-026)
(c) a sign that appears on any surface on a property (including a sign on construction
hoarding authorized by the City on or abutting a property) except a wall of a building,
and has no independent structure of its own, except:
(i) consisting only of the following:
1. the name of the business on the property;
2. the registered trademark of the business on the property;
3. the ownership of the business on the property; or
4. the name of an activity, product or service available or to be available on
the property; and
(ii) for all branding signs other than sign on construction hoarding, in a commercial,
industrial or institutional zone or on that part of a property where the use is commercial,
industrial or institutional;
commemorative sign
(d) a commemorative plaque or cornerstone except:
2
(i) with a maximum sign area of 0.3 m ; and
(ii) at least 1.5 m from a street line or property line;
directional sign
(e) a sign which gives directions or instructions for the control of vehicular or pedestrian
traffic including an entry or exit sign except:
(i) if the directional sign is wall-mounted:
2
1. with a maximum sign area of 1 m ; and
2. at least 2.8 m above grade if the directional sign projects more than 10
cm;
(ii) if the directional sign is not wall-mounted:
2
1. with a maximum sign area of 0.5 m ;
(11-230)
2. with a maximum height of 1.5 m; and
3. at least 1.5 m from a street line, property line or driveway line;
(iii) on the property for which directions or instructions are being given; and
(iv) in a commercial, industrial or institutional zone or on that part of a property
where the use is commercial, industrial or institutional;
home occupation sign
(f) a sign advertising a home occupation except:
2
(i) with a maximum sign area of 0.3 m ;
(ii) with no illumination;
(iii) in a residential zone; and
(iv) attached to a wall of the home occupation the home occupation sign is
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 25 of 35
advertising;
incidental sign
(g) a sign that has a purpose incidentally related to use or occupancy that is intended to
assist the public with the location of facilities or provides courtesy or directional
information only except:
2
(i) with a maximum sign area of 1.0 m ;
(ii) if the incidental sign is a preview menu board, its sign area may be an
electronic message display provided the sign area is not visible from the street;
(iii) at least 1.5 m from a street line or property line;
(iv) on the property of the use or occupancy the incidental sign is incidentally
related to; and
(v) in an agricultural, commercial, industrial or institutional zone or on that part of a
property where the use is agricultural, commercial, industrial or institutional;
mural
(h) an artistic work applied to exterior of a building or structure that does not include any
advertising except:
(i) with a maximum sign area of 50% of the wall on which the mural is displayed;
and
(ii) in a commercial zone;
open house directional sign
(i) a temporary, free-standing sign advertising an open house except:
(i) between 10:00 a.m. and 6 p.m. of the day of the open house;
2
(ii) with a maximum sign area of 0.5 m ;
(iii) not displayed on a traffic island or median or attached to a light standard or
utility pole; and
(iv) at least 0.3 m from a sidewalk;
real property sale, lease or rent sign
(j) a sign advertising the sale, lease or rent of real property except:
(i) for a maximum of 14 days after a firm sale is reported to the local realtors
association or after the agreement to lease or rent has been finalized;
(ii) if the real property sale, lease or rent sign is for one dwelling with a maximum
2
sign area 0.6 m ;
(iii) if the real property sale, lease or rent sign is for any real property other than
2
one dwelling with a maximum sign area of 4.0 m ;
(iv) with no illumination; and
(v) on the property which is being sold, leased or rented;
religious emblem
(k) an emblem of religious organization except on private property;
sale of seasonal farm produce sign
(l) a sign advertising the sale of seasonal farm produce except:
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 26 of 35
2
(i) with a maximum sign area of 3.0 m ; and
(ii) in an agricultural zone;
trade sign
(m) a sign advertising work performed to repair, renovate or landscape except:
(i) while the work is being performed;
2
(ii) with a maximum sign area of 0.48 m ;
(iii) with a maximum height of 0.8 m; and
(iv) with no illumination;
window sign
(n) a sign painted, etched, or attached to the interior or exterior surface of a window which
is intended to be seen from off the property except:
(i) if the window sign is an electronic message display, with a maximum sign area
2
of 0.48 m ;
(ii) if window sign is not electronic message display, with a maximum sign area of
50% of the window surface; and
(iii) in a commercial, industrial or institutional zone or on that part of a property
where the use is commercial, industrial or institutional;
yard, garage or lawn sale sign
(o) a sign advertising a yard, garage or lawn sale except:
(i) with a maximum of 4 signs;
(ii) displayed no earlier than the day before the sale and removed no later than
the day of the sale;
(iii) for a maximum of 36 hours; and
2
(iv) with a maximum sign area of 0.2 m .
PART 6.0
VARIANCES
6.1 Any person may apply for a variance from this By-law or any provision thereof.
6.2 An application for variance shall be made on the form prescribed by the City and shall
be accompanied by the applicable fee, as set out in the City’s User Fees and Charges
By-law.
6.3 Variances may be authorized by the Director.
6.4 The General Manager may authorize a variance if in his or her opinion the general
intent and purpose of the By-law are maintained.
6.5 In considering an application for a variance, the Director shall have regard for:
(a) special circumstances or conditions applying to the land, building or use referred to in
the application;
(b) whether strict application of the provisions of this By-law in the context of the special
circumstances applying to the land, building or use, would result in practical difficulties
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 27 of 35
or unnecessary and unusual hardship for the applicant, inconsistent with the general
intent and purpose of this By-law;
(c) whether such special circumstances or conditions are pre-existing and not created by
the sign owner or applicant; and
(d) whether the sign that is the subject of the variance will alter the essential character of
the area in which the sign will be located.
6.6 An applicant may appeal the variance application decision of the Director within 21
days of the decision is made to the Economic Development and Planning Committee
or any successor Committee.
6.7 The City Clerk shall notify the applicant once a hearing date before the Planning and
Economic Development Committee or any successor Committee has been fixed and if
the applicant does not attend at the appointed time and place, the Committee may
proceed in the absence of the applicant and the applicant shall not be entitled to
further notice in the proceeding.
6.8 Council may uphold or vary the recommendations of the Planning and Economic
Development Committee or any successor Committee or do any act or make any
decision that it might have done had it conducted the hearing itself and the applicant
shall not be entitled to a further hearing on the matter before Council and the decision
of Council shall be final.
6.9 A variance from this By-law shall expire 6 months from the date of issuance unless the
sign is displayed for its intended purpose and a variance shall expire upon the removal
of the sign.
PART 7.0
PENALTIES AND ENFORCEMENT
7.1 Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law or fails to comply with an
(11-230)
order made under this By-law is guilty of an offence.
7.2 A director or officer of a corporation who knowingly concurs in a contravention of this
By-law is guilty of an offence.
7.3 Every person convicted under this By-law is liable:
(a) upon a first conviction, to a maximum fine of $5,000.00;
(b) upon a subsequent conviction, to a maximum fine of $10,000.00.
7.4 Notwithstanding section 7.3, where the person convicted is a corporation, the
corporation is liable:
(a) upon a first conviction, to a maximum fine of not more than $10,000;
(b) upon any subsequent conviction, to a maximum fine of not more than
$25,000.
7.5 Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction
has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition to
any other remedy or penalty provided for by law, make an order prohibiting the
continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
7.6 Where a sign is displayed on, over, partly on, or partly over, property owned by or
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 28 of 35
under the jurisdiction of the City and not in accordance with the regulations of this By-
law, the sign may be removed immediately by the City without notice or compensation.
7.7 Where a sign is displayed in contravention of this By-law, the Director may
immediately pull down or remove any sign that he determines constitutes a safety
hazard or a concern without notice or compensation.
7.8 Where a sign does not comply with this By-law or a permit issued under this Bylaw,
the Director may order the sign owner to remove or bring the sign into compliance in
the manner and within the time specified in the order.
7.9 The order mentioned in section 7.8 may be served:
(a) by personal service upon the sign owner;
(b) by prepaid registered mail sent to the last address of the sign owner, shown on the
records of the City; or
(c) by prominently posting a copy of the order either on the sign in respect of which the
order is made, or on the property upon which the sign is displayed.
7.10 Where the order is served in accordance with section 7.8 it is deemed to have been
received by the party being served upon the mailing or posting of the order.
7.11 Where a sign is not removed or is not brought into conformity as required by an order
under section 7.8, the Director may have the sign removed without notice or
compensation. For this purpose, the Director, an officer and their contractor or other
agent may enter upon the property at any reasonable time.
7.12 The cost incurred by the City in removing a sign under this part of the By- law is
deemed to be municipal taxes and may be added to the collector‘s roll and collected in
the same manner as municipal taxes. Despite the foregoing, the cost incurred by the
City in removing a sign under this part of the By-law is a debt payable to the City and
may be recovered in any court of competent jurisdiction.
7.13 Any sign removed by the City shall be stored for 28 days, during which time the sign
owner may redeem such sign upon payment of the applicable fee prescribed in the
City’s User Fees and Charges By-law
7.14 Where a sign has been removed by the City and has been stored for a period of 28
days and has not been redeemed by the sign owner, such sign may be destroyed or
otherwise disposed of by the City without notice or compensation.
PART 8.0
CONFLICT
8.1 Where a provision of this By-law conflicts with a provision of any other by- law or any
federal or provincial statute or regulation, the provision that establishes the higher
standard to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public shall prevail.
PART 9.0
VALIDITY
9.1 If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any subsection, section or part of this By-
law invalid, it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 29 of 35
to be in force.
PART 10.0
TRANSITION AND REPEAL
10.1 All permits issued under By-law 06-243 which are current and valid on the day
this By-law comes into force shall be deemed to be:
(a) current and valid under this By-law; and
(b) subject to all of the applicable provisions of this By-law, including but not limited
to expiring and being renewable as though they had been issued under this By-
law.
10.2 All prosecutions and other enforcement processes commenced under By- law
No. 06-243 which have not been completed on the day this By-law comes into
force shall be completed under By-law No. 06-243 as if it had not be repealed.
10.3 By-law No. 06-243 is repealed as of the day on which this By-law comes into
force.
PART 11.0
EFFECTIVE DATE
11.1 This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 23rd day of February 2022.
Fred Eisenberger Rose Caterini
Mayor City Clerk
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 30 of 35
Schedule 1(22-031)
Election Signs
DEFINITIONS
1. In this Schedule:
“Advance Voting Day” means one or more days that are designated for electors to cast
ballots prior to Voting Day;
"Boulevard" means all parts of the Road Allowance, excluding any Roadway or Sidewalk;
“Campaign Office” means a building or structure, or part of a building or structure, used by
a Candidate or an agent of a Candidate or by a Registered Third Party or an agent of a
Registered Third Party as part of an Election campaign and registered with the Clerk as the
Candidate or Registered Third Party’s Campaign Office;
“Campaign Office Election Sign” means a sign displayed at a Campaign Office which
displays the name of a Candidate in a municipal or school board Election, or the name of a
Candidate and/or the name and/or logo of a political party in a federal or provincial Election,
or the name of a Registered Third Party and the location of a Candidate’s or Registered
Third Party’s Campaign Office in any Election;
“Candidate” means a person whose nomination to run in a Municipal, Provincial or Federal
election, including school board elections, has been certified or confirmed by the necessary
Election official as required by the governing legislation;
“City Clerk” means the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton or their designate;
“City Property” means property owned by or under the control of the City, and its agencies,
boards or commissions and includes the Road Allowance;
“Director” means the City’s Director of Licensing and By-law Services and/or their
designate;
“Election” means a federal or provincial election or by-election, a municipal election or by-
election, a school board election or by-election, a federal, provincial or municipal referendum
and any question submitted to the electors by a federal, provincial or municipal government;
“Election Bumper Sticker” means a label or sticker measuring not more than 7.62
centimetres (3 inches) by 29.21 centimetres (11.5 inches) which is affixed to a Vehicle and
used for the purposes of advertising, promoting, opposing or taking a position with respect to
any Candidate, Election or political party, or influencing electors to vote for or against an
issue associated with any Candidate, Election or political party, or influencing electors to vote
for or against any Candidate or political party or position;
“Election Campaign Material” means pamphlets, brochures or any articles of clothing
distributed by or on behalf of a Candidate or Registered Third Party for the same purposes
as an Election Sign;
“Election Sign” means any object, entity, thing, surface, structure, display and any other
component parts which are used as a visual medium or display for the purposes of:
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 31 of 35
(i) advertising, promoting, opposing or taking a position with respect to any Candidate,
Election, political party, or question or by-law submitted to the electors on the ballot under
the Canada Elections Act, the Election Act, the Municipal Elections Act, 1996, or any
other legislation; or
(ii) influencing electors to vote for or against a Candidate, political party, or question or by-
law submitted to the electors on the ballot under the Canada Elections Act, the Election
Act, the Municipal Elections Act, 1996, or any other legislation.
An Election Sign can take any form but does not include Election Campaign Material or an
Election Bumper Sticker;
“Election Vehicle Sign” means any form of Election Sign, displayed in or on a Vehicle,
excluding an Election Bumper Sticker;
“Municipal Elections Act” means the Municipal Elections Act, 1996, S.O. 1996, c.32,
Sched (MEA) as amended, and any Regulations thereunder;
“Parks By-law” means the City of Hamilton By-law 01-219, as amended or any successor
by-law thereto;
“Private Property” means any land or real property other than City Property and includes
property owned or under the control of the Provincial or Federal Government and their
respective agencies, boards or commissions, and excludes the Road Allowance abutting the
Private Property;
“Registered Third Party” means:
(a) one of the following whose notice of resignation has been certified by the City Clerk
pursuant to section 88.6 of the Municipal Elections Act: (i) an individual who is normally a
resident in Ontario; or (ii) a corporation that carries on business in Ontario; or (iii) a Trade
Union that holds bargaining rights for employees in Ontario;
(b) an individual, corporation or other entity that compiles with the requirements set forth in
section 37 of the Election Finances Act and has been registered by the Chief Electoral
Officer pursuant to the Election Finances Act, where that Act requires; or
(c) and individual, corporation or group that complies with the requirements set forth in
section 352 of the Canada Elections Act and has been registered by the Chief Electoral
Officer pursuant to the Canada Election Act, where the Act requires,
And a “Third Party Advertiser” has the same meaning
“Road Allowance” means the allowance for a public road and includes the travelled and
untravelled portions, including the Roadway, Boulevard, and Sidewalks;
“Roadway” means that part of a Road Allowance that is improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic including reserved lanes, shoulders, curbs and gutters;
“Sidewalk" includes all such parts of a Road Allowance as are set aside and improved
primarily for the use of pedestrians;
“Third Party Advertisement” means a sign or advertisement in any broadcast, print,
electronic or other medium that has purpose of promoting, supporting or opposing a
Candidate in an Election, or intended to influence persons to vote for or against any
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 32 of 35
Candidate or any question submitted to the electors, and which has been displayed without
the authorization, direction or involvement of a Candidate; (See Section 1(1) of the MEA)
“Trade Union” means a trade union as defined in the Labour Relations Act, 1995 or the
Canada Labour Code (Canada) and includes a central, regional or district labour council in
Ontario;(See Section 1(1) of the MEA)
“Vehicle” means a vehicle as defined in the Highway Traffic Act, R.S.O. 1990, c. H8 as
amended;
“Voting Day” means the day on which the final vote is to be taken in an Election; and (See
Section 1(1) of the MEA)
“Voting Place” means the location(s) where electors cast their ballots as established and
approved by the federal, provincial or municipal Election officials and includes the entire
property and all the boundaries associated with it, including any abutting Road Allowance,
when such Voting Place is located within a City Property or Private Property and shall also
include the common elements when the Voting Place is located within a Private Property.
2. Terms used in this Schedule and not defined herein shall have the same meaning as
given to those terms in Part 1.0 the By-law.
SCOPE
3. This Schedule applies to and regulates all Election Signs displayed on property within the
City. Where a provision of this Schedule conflicts with a provision of any federal or
provincial statute or regulation or any By-law, the provision that establishes the higher
standard to protect the health, safety and welfare of the general public shall prevail.
4. This Schedule shall not apply to signs displayed by the City or the provincial or federal
governments to provide information concerning an Election or any part of an Election
process.
5. This Schedule shall not apply to any Road Allowance under the jurisdiction of the Ministry
of Transportation.
INTENT
6. In addition to the purposes listed in Section 2.3 of this By-law, the intent of this Schedule
is to regulate Election Signs in the City in a manner that recognizes the importance of the
constitutional right to freedom of expression and protects and promotes that right, subject
only to minimal and reasonable limits, with the intent of authorizing signs that provide
members of the public and others with pertinent information relating to upcoming
Elections.
ADMINISTRATION
7. The City Clerk shall be responsible for the administration of this Schedule and the
Director shall be responsible for the enforcement of this Schedule.
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 33 of 35
ELECTION SIGNS
8. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign except in accordance
with:
(a) section 4.1 of this By-law (General Prohibitions and Regulations);
(b) section 5.1 of this By-law (Prohibited Signs); and
(c) the specific regulations set forth in this Schedule.
9. A person shall be deemed to be displaying an Election Sign if that person has custody of,
or control over, the sign or the property on which the Election Sign is located.
TIMING
10. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign associated with a federal
or provincial Election, prior to the date the writ of election is issued.
11. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign associated with a
municipal Election before 28 days in advance of Voting Day.
12. Notwithstanding section 11 of this Schedule, Campaign Office Election Signs for
Candidates may be displayed once a Candidate has filed their nomination papers and
paid the required filing fee or a Third Party Advertiser has registered with the City Clerk.
13. Notwithstanding section 11 of this Schedule, Election Vehicle Signs may be displayed
once a Candidate has filed their nomination papers and paid the required filing fee or a
Third Party Advertiser has registered with the City Clerk.
SIZE
14. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign with a sign area greater
than 1.5 square meters when it is located on a property used for residential purposes
including:
(a) a Single Detached Dwelling;
(b) a Semi Detached Dwelling;
(c) a Duplex;
(d) a Triplex;
(e) a Fourplex or Quadruplex;
(f) a Street Townhouse;
(g) a Mobile Home;
(h) a Residential Care Facility for 6 or less residents;
(i) a Lodging House for 6 or less lodgers;
(j) a Retirement Home for 6 or less residents; or
(k) an Emergency Shelter for 6 or less residents.
15. An Election Sign with a sign area larger than 1.5 square meters that is displayed on a
property with a use other than as described in section 14 (a)-(k) inclusive of this
Schedule, shall comply with all applicable regulations under Part 5 of this By-law
provided that no permit, except any permit required under the Building Code Act, 1992,
S.O. 1992, c. 23, as amended, if applicable, is required.
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 34 of 35
CONTENT
16. Third Party Advertisements, including any Election Signs, shall contain valid and current
contact information including the name of the Registered Third Party, the municipality
where the Registered Third Party is registered (if applicable), and a telephone number,
mailing address or email address at which the Registered Third Party may be contacted.
This contact information shall be displayed using a minimum font size of 24. (See section
88.5 of the MEA)
17. No person shall display an Election Sign with electronic message display.
18. Except for a sign displayed by the City in accordance with section 4 of this Schedule, no
person shall reproduce the City’s logo, the logo of the Hamilton Street Railway, the logo
of the Hamilton Police Service, the City’s municipal election logo, or any other logo in
which the City holds an interest, or the City’s crest or seal, in whole or in part, on any
Election Sign, or Election Campaign Materials. For the purposes of this section, any
reference to “City” includes the City’s agencies, boards and commissions.
19. No person shall display an Election Sign unless it contains all information required by
applicable federal, provincial or municipal law, or any regulation thereunder.
LOCATION
City Property
20. Except as permitted by section 21 and section 23 of this Schedule, no person shall
display or permit the display of an Election Sign on City Property.
21. The following Election Signs are permitted on City Property:
(a) the holding of a hand-held Election Sign;
(b) the display of a Poster in accordance with the regulations set forth in section
5.8.2(f) of this By-law;
(c) an Election Vehicle Sign while affixed to a Vehicle that is in use on any Roadway
in the City in accordance with all applicable laws and by-laws, or while in use on
any roadway as defined in the Parks By-law, or while authorized to be parked in
any municipal parking lot, authorized on street parking space, or public parking
area or parking space as defined by the Parks By-law; and
(d) the display of an Election Sign on commercial advertising space owned or
operated by the City or one of its agencies, boards or commissions where the
advertising has been approved by the City or one of its agencies, boards or
commissions pursuant to the City’s Policy for Commercial Advertising and
Sponsorship.
Updated: February 22, 2022
Page 35 of 35
Private Property
22. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign on Private Property or
display or permit the display of an Election Vehicle Sign on a Vehicle except with the
permission of the owner of the Private Property or owner of the Vehicle as the case may
be.
23. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign on any portion of the
Road Allowance, excluding that portion of the Boulevard.
(a) between the Sidewalk and Private Property line, or
(b) where there is no Sidewalk, between the Roadway and Private Property line.
24. In accordance with section 88.2 of the Municipal Elections Act, 1996, owners of, or
tenants in, an apartment building, condominium building, non-profit housing co-operative
or a gated community may display Election Signs on the premises that they own or lease
subject to any reasonable restrictions on the size or type of Election Sign that may be
established by the landlord, property manager, co-operative or condominium corporation.
ON VOTING DAY OR ADVANCE VOTING DAY
25. No person shall display or permit the display of an Election Sign:
(a) at a property used as a Voting Place on Voting Day or on an Advance Voting Day;
(b) at a property used for the administration of Election processes on Voting Day or
on an Advance Voting Day; or
(See section 48 of the MEA)
26. For certainty, section 25 of this Schedule applies to Election Vehicle Signs.
REMOVAL
27. Candidates and Registered Third Parties shall remove all Election Signs no later than
seventy-two (72) hours following 11:59 p.m. on Voting Day of the Election for which the
Election Sign was displayed.
28. Notwithstanding section 27 of this Schedule, where an Election Sign has been displayed
on Private Property, the owner or occupant of the property shall ensure that the Election
Sign is removed within the time frame set out in section 26 of this Schedule.
29. No person shall dispose of an Election Sign on City Property except in receptacles
designated for waste or recycling.
Updated: February 22, 2022




Content from 10221 property standards bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-221
PROPERTY STANDARDS BY-LAW
Being a By-law to Prescribe Standards for the Maintenance
and Occupancy of Property
CONSOLIDATION
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-laws
listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience only and is
not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate reference to the By-law, certified copies
should be obtained through the City Clerk's Office.
Revised August 2021
CITY OF HAMILTON
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW 10-221
PROPERTY STANDARDS BY-LAW
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-law No. Effective Date
11-057 February 9, 2011 Amend Subsection 24(3) – Waste Chutes
11-111 April 13, 2011 Replace Subsection 9(1)(a); Delete Subsection
22(d) – Visual Barriers
13-127 May 8, 2013 Amend subsections 18(1) and 21(1)
16-093 March 30, 2016 Amend Section 25 - Elevators
16-161 June 8, 2016 Amend 1(a) and 26(3) to include ants
16-262 October 12, 2016 Add Subsections 25(4)(a) and (b) – Elevator
Signs
17-126 June 28, 2017 Replace Subsection 6(2), 6(3) and 7(3) –
Vacant/Damaged Buildings
19-100 May 9, 2019 Replace Subsection 20(2) – dead, decayed,
damaged trees
19-138 June 12, 2019 Replace Subsection 18(1) – grading plan
20-018 February 12, Include Incomplete and Unrepairable Buildings
2020
20-173 August 21, 2020 Include standards for the construction and
maintenance of water supply lines
21-144 August 10, 2021 Retitling sections and adding sub-sections
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW N0.10-221
PROPERTY STANDARDS BY-LAW
Being a by-law to prescribe standards for the maintenance and occupancy
of property and to repeal By-law No. 03-117.
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton deems it desirable to establish standards for
the maintenance and occupancy of certain properties, so that owners and occupants
provide minimum standards for persons who may live at, attend or otherwise be affected
by the condition of the properties;
AND WHEREAS section 15.1(3) of the Building Code Act, 1992 authorizes the City of
Hamilton to pass a by-law prescribing standards for the maintenance and occupancy of
property;
AND WHEREAS section 15.6(1) of the Building Code Act, 1992 provides for the
establishment of a Property Standards Committee;
AND WHEREAS Part XII of the Municipal Act, 2001 and section 15.5 of the Building Code
Act, 1992 authorize the City of Hamilton to charge fees for services and activities carried
out under this By-law;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
SHORT TITLE
1. This By-law may be referred to as the "Property Standards By-law" or the "Hamilton
Property Standards By-law".
DEFINITIONS AND INTERPRETATION
2(1) In this By-law:
“appliances” means, but is not limited to, a stove, refrigerator, clothes washer, clothes
dryer, dishwasher, air conditioner or a hot water tank; [As Amended: By-law 21-144]
"basement" means that portion of a building from a floor to the underside of a ceiling
that is located partially or entirely below the adjacent finished ground level;
"building" means any structure used or intended to be used for supporting or
sheltering any use or occupancy;
"Building Code" means the Building Code Act, 1992 and any regulations made
under that Act;
"City" means the municipality the City of Hamilton or the geographic area of the City of
Hamilton as the context requires;
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 1
"Committee" means the Property Standards Committee established under this By-
law;
"debris" means the remains of anything broken or discarded;
"Director" means the City's Director of Licensing and By-law Services and their
designate or successor; [As Amended: By-law 19-100]
"domesticated mouse or rat" means a mouse or rat:
(a) kept as a pet by an occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit, normally in an
enclosed cage or container within the dwelling or dwelling unit;
(b) cared for and fed by the occupant, which care includes clean up and removal of
mouse or rat waste and soiled rodent bedding from the dwelling or dwelling unit
and cage or container; and
(c) kept in compliance with any applicable animal-control laws or bylaws.
"dwelling", except in subsection 31(5) where it has the ordinary meaning given to
the term, means a lodging house or residential care facility both as defined in the
City's zoning by-laws.
"dwelling unit" means a room or a suite of rooms used or intended to be used by
one or more persons for the purposes of human habitation and to which an
independent entrance is provided from outside the building or from a common
interior hallway vestibule or stairway but does not include a room or a suite of rooms
in a lodging house, long-term care facility, hospital, hotel or residential care facility
all as defined in the City's zoning by-laws;
"farm" means an agricultural operation as defined in the Farming and Food
Production Protection Act, 1998 and includes such an operation that is not carried
on with the expectation of gain but otherwise meets the definition in that Act;
"guard" means a protective barrier, with or without openings through it, that is
around openings in floors or at the open sides of stairs, landings, balconies,
mezzanines, galleries, raised walkways or other locations to· prevent accidental
falls from one level to another;
"habitable room" means a bedroom, living room, dining room, kitchen, family
room, recreation room, basement, bath or shower room, toilet room, laundry room
and any other room or space in a dwelling or dwelling unit used for living, eating or
sleeping;
"heritage attribute" means, in relation to real property, and to buildings and
structures on real property, an attribute of the property, building or structure that
contributes to its cultural heritage value or interest and that is defined or described:
(i) in a by-law designating a property passed under section 29, Part IV of the
Ontario Heritage Act and identified as a heritage attribute, reason for
designation or otherwise;
(ii) in a Minister's order made under section 34.5, Part IV of the Ontario Heritage
Act and identified as a heritage attribute or otherwise;
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 2
(iii) in a by-law designating a heritage conservation district passed under section
41, Part V of the Ontario Heritage Act and identified as a heritage attribute or
otherwise;
in the supporting documentation required for a by-law designating a heritage
conservation district, including but not limited to a heritage conservation district
plan, assessment or inventory, and identified as a heritage attribute or
otherwise;
"Medical Officer of Health" means the City's Medical Officer of Health or his or
her designate;
"occupant" means any person or persons over the age of 18 years in possession
of a property;
"occupancy" means the use or intended use of a building or part thereof for the
shelter or support of persons, animals or property;
"officer" means a person appointed by the City of Hamilton or assigned by the
Director to enforce this By-law and, for the purposes of section 26, means a Public
Health Inspector or any other person assigned or appointed by the Medical Officer
of Health to enforce that section;
"owner" includes:
(i) an owner in fee simple;
(ii) the person for the time being, managing or receiving the rent of the property
in connection with which the word is used whether on the person's own
account, or as agent or trustee of any other person, or who would receive
the rent if the property were let;
(iii) a lessee or occupant of the property who, under the terms of a lease, is
required to repair and maintain the property in accordance with the standards
for the maintenance and occupancy of property;
"Part IV heritage property" means real property, including all buildings and
structures thereon, which has been designated by the City of Hamilton or any
of its former municipalities under section 29 of the Ontario Heritage Act, or which
has been designated by the Minister under section 34.5 of the Ontario Heritage
Act;
"Part V heritage property" means real property, including all buildings and
structures thereon, located within a heritage conservation district, which has been
designated by the City of Hamilton or any of its former municipalities under section
41 of the Ontario Heritage Act;
"pest" means any mouse, rat, bed bug, flea, wasp, hornet, ant or cockroach, but
does not include any domesticated mouse or rat;
[As Amended: By-law 16-161 s. 1]
"property" means a building or structure, or part of a building or structure, and
includes the lands and premises appurtenant thereto and all mobile structures,
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 3
mobile buildings, mobile homes, outbuildings, fences, retaining walls, and erections
thereon, whether heretofore or hereafter erected, and also includes vacant property,
a Part IV heritage property and a Part V heritage property;
"property standards order" means an order made under subsection 28(1) of this
By- law;
"protective device" means any mechanical device designed for the purpose of
inhibiting movement by latching or automatic engagement or in any other reasonable
manner;
"repair" includes the provision of such facilities, the making of additions or alterations
or the taking of any other action that may be required to ensure that a property conforms
with the standards established in this By-law;
"retaining wall" means a wall that holds back soil or loose material to prevent it
from assuming the natural angle of repose at locations where a change in ground
elevation occurs;
"sanitary sewage" means liquid or water borne waste:
(i) of industrial or commercial origin; or
(ii) of domestic origin, including human body waste, toilet or other bathroom
waste, and shower, tub, culinary, sink and laundry waste;
"sewage system" means:
(i) the City's system of storm sewers, sanitary sewers and combined sewers; or
(ii) a private sewage disposal system approved by the City's Chief Building Official
or other responsible authority;
"storm water" means water that is discharged from a surface as a result of rainfall,
snowmelt, snowfall or other precipitation;
"visual barrier" means a barrier that acts as a screen consisting of:
(i) a wall or fence;
(ii) a continuous planting of suitable and healthy trees or shrubs;
(iii) an earth berm; or
(iv) any combination of the above.
"waste" means a substance or material that is unusable or unwanted;
“water supply line” means the supply line or lines located on private lands which
connect the plumbing system of a building to the municipal water system but does
not include a water meter owned by the City (20-173)
"yard" means the land within the boundary lines of a property and not occupied by
any principal building.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 4
2(2) All measurements in this By-law are given the metric short form.
SCOPE
3(1) No person, being the owner or occupant of a property, shall fail to maintain the
property in conformity with the standards required in this By-law.
3(2) The owner of any property which does not conform to the standards in this By-law
shall repair and maintain the property to conform to the standards or shall clear the
property of all buildings, structures or debris and shall leave the property in a graded
and levelled condition, provided that no building or structure on a Part IV heritage
property or a Part V heritage property shall be altered or cleared, including but not
limited to removed, demolished or relocated, except in accordance with the Ontario
Heritage Act.
3(3) This By-law does not apply so as to prevent a farm from carrying out a normal farm
practice as provided for and defined under the Farming and Food Production
Protection Act, 1998.
GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL DESIGNATED HERITAGE PROPERTIES
4(1) In addition to the standards, obligations and requirements that apply to all property
under sections 5 through 27 both inclusive, all heritage attributes of Part IV heritage
properties, including both interior and exterior heritage attributes, and all heritage
attributes of Part V heritage properties shall be:
(a) maintained so as to prevent deterioration; and
(b) repaired of any damage.
4(2) Subject to any applicable provisions of the Ontario Heritage Act:
(a) where subsection 4(1) can be complied with by means of repair, despite
any other provision to the contrary, the heritage attribute shall not be
replaced and the repair shall be undertaken in a manner that minimizes
damage to the heritage attribute;
(b) where subsection 4(1) cannot be complied with by means of repair, despite any
other provision to the contrary, the heritage attribute shall be replaced with
material of the same type as the original material and in keeping with the design,
colour, texture and any other distinctive feature as the original material or in
such a manner as to replicate the design, colour, texture and any other
distinctive feature of the original material.
4(3) (a) In addition to the standards, obligations and requirements that apply to all
property under sections 5 through 27 both inclusive, a part of a Part IV
heritage property or a Part V heritage property, including but not limited to a
roof, wall, floor, retaining wall or foundation, that supports or protects a
heritage attribute and without which the heritage attribute may be at risk of
deteriorating or being damaged shall be structurally sound and maintained so
as to properly perform its intended function.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 5
(b) Paragraph 4(3)(a) shall be complied with in a manner that minimizes damage
to the heritage attribute.
GENERAL STANDARDS FOR ALL PROPERTIES
5(1) Except as may otherwise be specified in the sections, the standards, obligations and
requirements in sections 5.1 through 27 both inclusive apply to all property.
[As Amended: By-law 20-018 s. 3]
5(2) Every building shall be kept free of any condition which constitutes a health or safety
hazard.
5(3) This By-law does not apply to matters which, in the opinion of the Director, are minor
in nature.
5.1(1) Where, in the opinion of an officer, there has been no substantial progress on the
construction or demolition of a building, structure or portion thereof for a period of more
than one year, such building, structure, or portion thereof shall be:
(a) demolished in accordance with all applicable statutes, regulations and by-laws; or,
(b) completed within a reasonable time as specified by the officer, in accordance with
all applicable statutes, regulations and by-laws, including this By-law.
5.1.(2) A statement certified by the Chief Building Official or an officer that a permit issued under
the Building Code Act, 1992 was revoked under clause 8(10)(c) of the Building Code Act,
1992 is receivable in evidence as proof, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that
there has been no substantial progress on the construction or demolition of the building,
structure, or portion thereof that was the subject of the permit for a period of more than
one year.
[As Amended: By-law 20-018 s. 1]
VACANT AND/OR DAMAGED BUILDINGS
6(1) In addition to complying with all other applicable provisions of this By-law, the owner of
building that is vacant or is damaged by accident, storm, fire, neglect or otherwise shall
comply with this section.
6(2) Where any building is vacant or is damaged by accident, storm, fire, neglect or
otherwise, the owner may be required to protect such building and adjoining
properties against damage arising from the entry of unauthorized persons by closing
and securing openings to the building.
6(3) For the purposes of subsection 6(2), doors, windows, hatches and other openings
through which entry may be obtained are required to be maintained so as to properly
perform their intended function and secured from unauthorized entry, or entry shall
be prevented by closing and securing an opening with:
(a) wood sheathing of at least 12.7 mm plywood which is weather resistant,
completely covers the opening, is securely fastened to the building, and is
painted in a manner conforming with paragraphs 7(3)(b), (c) or (d);
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 6
(b) metal sheathing which is weather resistant, completely covers the opening, is,
where possible, installed within the reveal of the exterior cladding, is securely
fastened to the building and, is painted in a manner conforming with paragraphs
7(3)(b), (c) or (d); or,
(c) brick or concrete block and mortar which completely covers the opening, is
securely fastened to the building, and is painted in a manner conforming with
paragraphs 7(3)(b), (c) or (d).
[As Amended: By-law 17-126 s. 1]
6(4) The options available in 6(3) shall be considered progressively more secure with (c)
being the most secure, and the minimum standard imposed by subsection 6(3) shall be
considered not to include the use of a less secure option which has, more than once,
failed to exclude unauthorized entry.
6(5) At any time where there are circumstances to support a more secure option, including
an option that is more secure than those listed in subsection 6(3), the owner shall supply
such more secure option as may be required by a property standards order.
6(6) The exterior walls and other surfaces of a building that is vacant or is damaged by
accident, storm, fire, neglect or otherwise shall be maintained so as to properly perform
their intended function.
6(7) Where a building remains vacant for a period of more than 90 days, the owner shall
ensure that all utilities serving the building, which are not required for safety or security
are properly disconnected or otherwise secured, to prevent accidental or malicious
damage to the building or adjoining property.
6(8) Where any building is vacant or is damaged by accident, storm, fire, neglect or otherwise,
and in the opinion of an officer or the Chief Building Official or an inspector appointed
under the Building Code Act, 1992 it is not feasible to repair the building to the standards
prescribed by this By-law without first demolishing the building or a portion of it, the owner
shall demolish the building or portion of it that it is not feasible to repair within one year of
it becoming so.
[As Amended: By-law 20-018 s.2]
VACANT AND/OR DAMAGED DESIGNATED HERITAGE PROPERTIES
7(1) In addition to complying with all other applicable provisions of this By-law, the owner of
building that is vacant or is damaged by accident, storm, fire, neglect or otherwise shall
comply with this section.
7(2) Despite subsection 6(7), where a building on a Part IV heritage property or a Part V
heritage property remains vacant for a period of more than 90 days, the owner shall
ensure that appropriate utilities serving the building are connected as required to
provide, maintain and monitor proper heating and ventilation to prevent damage caused
to the building by fluctuating temperatures and humidity.
7(3) Despite subsections 6(3) and 6(4), where a building on a Part IV heritage property or a
Part V heritage property is vacant or damaged by accident, storm, fire, neglect or
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 7
otherwise, the owner may be required to protect the building against the risks described
in subsection 6(2) and shall effectively prevent the entrance of all unauthorized person
by closing and securing openings to the building with boarding:
(a) which completely covers the opening and is properly fitted in a watertight manner
within the side jambs, the head jamb and the exterior bottom sill of the door or
window opening so the exterior trim and cladding remains uncovered and
undamaged by the boarding;
(b) on the window openings, which is painted a matte black to resemble window glass;
(c) on door openings, which is painted a colour that matches the colour of the original
door;
(d) on an opening other than a window or door opening, which is painted or otherwise
treated so that the colour matches the colour of the surrounding exterior of the
building; and
(e) which is fastened securely with screws at least 50 mm in length and installed at
appropriate intervals on centre. (As amended By-law 17-126 s.2)
7(4) Subject to any applicable provisions of the Ontario Heritage Act, the options available
in 7(3) shall be considered progressively more secure with (e) being the most secure,
and the minimum
standard imposed by subsection 7(3) shall be considered not to include the use of a
less secure option which has, more than once, failed to exclude unauthorized entry.
7(5) At any time where there are circumstances to support a more secure option, including
an option beyond that is more secure than those listed in subsection 7(3), the owner
shall supply such more secure option as may be required by a property standards order.
7(6) No window, door or other opening shall be closed or secured in accordance with
subsection 7(3) with brick, concrete blocking or any other masonry units and mortar,
except where required by a property standards order under subsection 7(4).
EXTERIOR OF BUILDINGS, STRUCTURES, FENCES AND RETAINING WALLS
All Exteriors
8(1) All exterior surfaces of a building, structure, fence or retaining wall, including a mobile
structure or building, shall be of materials which resist deterioration by the weather or
have resistant coatings applied to them, except that a farm building may have
unprotected wood surfaces.
8(2) An exterior wall, chimney, roof or other parts of a building, structure, fence or retaining
wall, including a mobile structure or building, shall be free from loose or insufficiently
secured, rotten, warped or broken materials and objects and such material and objects
shall be removed, repaired or replaced.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 8
Exterior of a Building
8(3) The exterior of a building shall be:
(a) maintained to prevent the entry of vermin and birds; and
(b) when opened or replaced during the course of alterations or renovations, shall be
insulated in order to minimize heat loss, air infiltration and moisture condensation
on the interior surfaces, in accordance with the Building Code.
Exterior Wall
8(4) An exterior wall and its components and attachments shall be:
(a) maintained to prevent their deterioration by painting, restoring or repairing the
walls, coping or flashing or by waterproofing the wall itself;
(b) repaired of vandalism or other damage including but not limited to broken
windows.
8(5) A roof and its components and attachments including the fascia board, soffit, cornice
and flashing shall be maintained to properly perform their intended functions including
but not limited to being in a weather-tight condition able to prevent the leakage of water
into the building;
DOORS, WINDOWS, SECURITY SYSTEMS AND LOCKING ETC.
All Doors, Windows, Etc.
9(1) (a) A door, window, hatch or other opening and its frame shall be maintained to
properly perform its intended functions and repaired or replaced if damaged
including but not limited to an exterior door, window, hatch or other opening and
its frame being constructed to minimize drafts and heat loss through the infiltration
of outside cold air.
(b) For the purposes of paragraph 9(1)(a) "damaged" includes but is not limited to:
(i) rotted or missing weather-stripping, caulking or hardware; or
(ii) broken or missing glass.
[As Amended: By-law 11-111, s.28]
9(2) A lock on a door, window, hatch or other opening that is designed to be unlocked with
a key or combination shall be maintained so as to properly perform its intended function
and repaired or replaced if damaged.
Doors
9(3) An exterior door or an entrance door to a dwelling. dwelling unit or a building containing
more than 3 dwelling units shall have hardware so as to be capable of being locked from
the outside and locked or otherwise secured from the inside.
Windows
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 9
9(4) An opening window shall have hardware so as to be capable of being locked or otherwise
secured from the inside.
9(5) A window in a dwelling or a dwelling unit designed to be open shall be fitted with screens
so as to prevent the entrance of insects and rodents and such screens shall be
maintained so as to properly perform their intended function.
9(6) (a) Upon the written request of an occupant of a dwelling unit in which children under
the age of 10 years are occupants, the owner of the dwelling unit shall subject
to paragraph 9(6)(b), provide and install a protective device on any window that:
(i) has a moveable sash; and
(ii) is more than 1.8 m above the adjacent finished ground level.
(b) The protective device under paragraph 9(6)(a) shall be installed within 7 days of
the delivery of the written request to the owner, the owner's agent or the
building's manager or superintendent, provided that such person and the
occupant giving notice may agree that the protective device is not required
on every such window that meets the requirements of paragraph 9(6)(a).
(c) The protective device under paragraph 9(6)(a) shall be installed and secured
in such a manner as to prevent opening of a window to any amount greater
than 100 mm.
(d) Where protective devices have not been installed on all of the windows
of a dwelling unit that:
(i) have a moveable sash; and
(ii) are more than 1.8 m above the adjacent finished ground level,
the owner of the dwelling unit, if the owner is not an occupant of the dwelling
unit, shall post or display a legible and clearly printed copy of subsection
9(6), conspicuously placed in the dwelling unit or the building containing the
dwelling unit so as to be clearly visible to the occupants of the dwelling unit.
Intercoms and Security Locking
9(7) In multiple dwellings where a voice communications system between each dwelling unit
and the front lobby and a security locking and release facilities for the entrance have
been provided and are controlled from each dwelling unit, such facilities shall be
maintained in good repair.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
VENTILATION
10(1) Natural or mechanical ventilation of a room or space in a building shall be Building Code
compliant, regularly cleaned, and maintained so as to properly perform its intended function.
10(2) A vent shall be designed and maintained to prevent the entry of rain, snow and
vermin.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 10
STRUCTURES, FOUNDATIONS AND BASEMENTS
Structures
11(1) Every part of a property shall be maintained in a structurally sound condition so as to
be capable of sustaining safely its own weight and any additional weight that may be
put on it through normal or permitted use, and having a factor of safety as required by
the Building Code.
Foundations and Basements
11(2) A foundation wall or a basement or crawl space floor shall be maintained so as to
properly perform its intended function.
Foundations
11(3) Every building, unless of concrete slab-on-grade design, shall be upon either full
foundation walls or piers, and all footings, foundation walls, and piers shall be of
concrete, masonry, or other material acceptable for construction under the
provisions of the Building Code and shall be sound, reasonably plumb, and
adequate to carry the loads imposed on them.
Basements
11(4) A basement or crawl space shall be maintained in a watertight condition so as to
prevent the leakage of water into the building.
STAIRWAYS, LANDINGS, BALCONIES, PORCHES, COMMON AREAS ETC.
Means of Access or Egress
12(1) An exterior or interior stairway, landing, balcony, porch, ramp or other means of
access or egress shall be maintained so as to be free of holes, cracks and other
defects which may constitute a possible safety hazard.
All Exterior Stairways, Landings, Balconies and Porches
12(2) An exterior stairway, landing, balcony, porch or ramp shall be kept free of furniture
or appliances, except for outdoor furniture on an exterior balcony or porch.
Treads and Risers
12(3) A tread or riser of an exterior or interior stairway that shows excessive wear or is
broken, warped or loose and all supporting structural members that are rotted or
deteriorated shall be repaired or replaced.
Guards, Handrails and Partial or Short Walls
12(4) (a) An exterior stairway with more than 3 risers and less than 7 risers or an
interior stairway in a dwelling or dwelling unit with more than 2 risers shall
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 11
have at least one handrail sufficient to prevent an accidental fall and such
handrail shall be repaired or replaced if damaged.
(b) Despite paragraph 12(4)(a), an exterior stairway with more than 3 risers and
less than 7 risers may have a partial or short wall, on either side sufficient to
prevent an accidental fall off the side of the exterior stairway and such partial
or short walls shall be repaired or replaced if damaged.
(c) Where access is provided for other than maintenance purposes:
(i) an exterior stairway with more than 6 risers; or
(ii) a landing, porch, balcony, mezzanine, gallery, raised walkway or roof,
with a difference in elevation at any point from the adjacent finished ground or
a floor of more than 600 mm shall be protected by Building Code compliant
guards on all open sides sufficient to prevent an accidental fall.
Common Areas
12(5) All interior common areas and exterior common areas shall be kept clean
and free of hazards.
12(6) For the purpose of subsection (5), “interior common areas” includes, but is
not limited to, laundry rooms, garbage rooms, corridors, lobbies, vestibules,
boiler rooms, parking garages, storage areas, stairways, mail collection
areas, and recreation rooms.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
INTERIOR STRUCTURAL COMPONENTS, FLOORS, CEILINGS AND WALLS
Structural Components
13(1) In every building all structural components including but not limited to all joists,
beams, studding, and roof rafters, shall be of sound material and adequate for the
load to which they are subjected.
Floors, Ceilings and Walls
13(2) A floor, ceiling or wall shall be:
(a) kept free from water penetration and from dampness arising from the
entrance of moisture through an exterior wall or roof or through a basement
or crawl space; and
(b) maintained in a condition free from mould or from conditions that may cause
mould to accumulate.
Floors
13(3) A basement shall have a floor of concrete, or other material acceptable under the
Building Code, to ensure water drainage and to guard against the entry of vermin.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 12
13(4) A floor shall be smooth and level and maintained so as to be free of all loose, warped,
protruding, broken or rotted boards that may create an unsafe condition or surface.
13(5) Where a floor has been covered with a sheet or vinyl floor covering or other flooring
that has become worn or torn so that it retains dirt or may create an unsafe condition,
the sheet or vinyl flooring or other floor covering shall be repaired or replaced
comparable in design and colour with adjoining decorative finishing materials.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
13(6) A bathroom, kitchen, laundry or shower room shall have a floor covering of water-
resistant material.
Ceilings and Walls
13(7) A wall or ceiling shall be maintained in a condition free from holes, open cracks, loose
coverings or other substantial defects.
13(8) Any repair or replacement to a wall or ceiling shall have a similar finish to that of the
original covering and comparable to the surrounding finishes.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
PLUMBING SYSTEMS
Plumbing Systems and Fixtures
14(1) The plumbing system and every plumbing fixture in a building shall be maintained
so as to properly perform its intended function and free from leaks and defects.
14(2) All piping used to supply or drain water and all appurtenances thereto shall be
protected from freezing.
14(3) A plumbing fixture connected to the sewage system shall be connected through a
water seal trap.
14(4) Sanitary sewage shall be discharged into the City sanitary sewer system where
such a system exists, and elsewhere sanitary sewage shall be disposed of in a
manner in accordance with the Building Code requirements for on-site sewage
systems.
Hot and Cold Water
14(5) A building to which water is available under pressure through piping shall be
provided with:
(a) piping for hot water, at a temperature of not less than 43° C, and cold water
connected to every kitchen, bath or shower room, or laundry room plumbing
fixture; and
(b) piping for cold water connected to every toilet and hose bib.
Dwellings and Dwelling Units
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 13
14(6) A dwelling or dwelling unit shall be provided with an approved supply of potable water
from at least one of the following sources:
(a) the City water system;
(b) a communal water system; or
(c) a private source.
14(7) (a) A lodging house shall contain at least the following working plumbing fixtures:
(i) a hand wash basin;
(ii) a toilet; and
(iii) a bathtub or shower.
(b) A residential care facility or a dwelling unit shall contain at least the following
working plumbing fixtures:
(i) a kitchen sink;
(ii) a toilet;
(iii) a hand wash basin; and
(iv) a bathtub or shower.
14(8) (12-173) In addition to any other requirements of this By-law, when a building is connected
to the City water system, the following standards shall apply:
(a) The water supply line shall be maintained so as to properly perform its
intended function and free from leaks and defects;
(b) The water supply line shall not include any materials that contain lead; and,
(c) Subsection (b) shall not apply if the water supply line connects to a portion of the
City water system that itself is constructed of materials that contain lead.
KITCHENS AND BATH OR SHOWER ROOMS AND TOILET ROOMS
Kitchens
15(1) A kitchen shall contain:
(a) a sink serviced with potable running water and a splash back which are water
and grease resistant;
2
(b) a work surface of at least .74 m , which is impervious to grease and water;
(c) storage facilities for food, dishes and cooking utensils having an interior capacity
3
of at least .8 m , of sufficient strength that they will not collapse, tip or, if fastened
to a wall, become detached when filled; and
(d) space sufficient to accommodate a cooking range or countertop cooking unit and
refrigerator without placing such cooking range, countertop cooking unit or
refrigerator in a location that provides access to or egress from the kitchen.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 14
(e) every cupboard, kitchen fixture and fitting shall be maintained in a state of good
repair and working order.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
Bath or Shower Rooms and Toilet Rooms
15(2) The floor and the walls to a minimum height of 0.9 m above the floor or bathtub of
every bath or shower room and toilet room shall be water-resistant and readily
cleaned.
15(3) Every bath or shower room and toilet room shall:
(a) be located within and accessible from the interior of the building;
(b) be fully enclosed, having a door capable of being closed so as to provide privacy
for the occupant;
(c) have a permanently installed working artificial lighting fixture; and
(d) be maintained so as to properly perform its intended function.
15(4) A hand wash basin shall be located in the same room as each toilet or in an
adjoining bath or shower room, provided that no sink in a kitchen shall be considered
a hand wash basin for the purposes of this subsection.
15(5) No toilet or urinal shall be located within a habitable room except a bath or shower
room, toilet room or other habitable room not used frequently or for extended periods
for living, eating or sleeping.
Dwellings and Dwelling Units
15(6) (a) A lodging house shall contain a bath or shower room and a toilet room.
(b) A residential care facility or a dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen, bath or
shower room and a toilet room.
APPLIANCES
15.1 Appliances supplied by the landlord of a rental unit shall be maintained in a good state
of repair and in a safe operable condition.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
HEATING SYSTEMS
Heating Systems
16(1) A heating system shall be installed that is capable of supplying during normal hours of
occupancy of the building sufficient heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 20°
C measured at 1.5 m above floor level and 1 m from exterior walls in all habitable rooms
not including a habitable room not used frequently or for extended periods for living,
eating or sleeping.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 15
16(2) A heating system shall be operated and maintained:
(a) so as to properly perform its intended function;
(b) free from unsafe conditions.
16(3) No furnace or boiler shall be located in a hallway or other means of access or egress.
16(4) Except in the event of an emergency, no occupied building shall be equipped with
portable heating equipment as the primary source of heat.
16(5) A heating system that is designed to burn solid or liquid fuel shall be provided with a
properly constructed and located receptacle for fuel storage or a place for fuel storage
so as to be free from fire or accident hazard.
Chimneys, Flues and Vent Pipes
16(6) A chimney, flue or vent pipe shall be maintained so as to prevent gases from leaking
into a building and maintenance shall include cleaning obstructions, filling open joints
and repairing masonry.
16(7) Fuel burning appliances or equipment used in a building shall be properly vented to the
outside air by means of a Canadian Standards Association approved or Building Code
or Gas Utilization Code compliant chimney, flue or vent pipe.
ELECTRICAL SERVICES
17(1) An electrical service shall comply with the Ontario Electrical Safety Code as enforced
by the Electrical Safety Authority.
LANDSCAPING, ETC.
18(1) Where features, including but not limited to building design and placement, site access
and servicing, waste storage, parking, loading, landscaping, grading, drainage and
storm water management, have been required by the City as a condition of development
or redevelopment approval or, in the case of grading or drainage, by an approved
grading plan, such features shall be repaired or maintained so as to ensure continuous
compliance with the City development or redevelopment approval requirements or the
approved grading plan.
[As Amended: By-law 19-138, s.2]
LIGHTING
19(1) A stairway, exterior exit and entrance doorway, bath or shower room, toilet room,
kitchen, corridor, basement, laundry room and utility room in a building shall have
permanently installed working lighting that shall be maintained so as to properly
perform its intended function.
19(2) A hallway, stairway, common area and underground parking area shall be
illuminated so as to provide safe passage.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 16
19(3) Lighting, including flood lighting, required as a condition of site development or
redevelopment, shall be maintained so as to properly perform its intended function
and in accordance with the recommended horizontal illuminance as set out under
the I.E.S. Lighting Handbook (2000) as amended or replaced from time to time.
19(4) Subject to subsection 19(5), outdoor lighting and indoor lighting that can be seen
outdoors shall be placed and maintained, or have a barrier placed and maintained,
so as to prevent or block direct illumination of the interior of a dwelling or dwelling
unit on adjoining property regardless of whether such dwelling or dwelling unit has
or may have shades, drapes or other interior window coverings.
19(5) Subsection 19(4) does not:
(a) apply to lighting located by a road authority;
(b) apply to property owned or occupied by a municipal, provincial or federal
government or authority;
(c) require lighting used in conjunction with commercial, industrial, institutional,
agricultural or recreational uses to be turned off at any time when the use is
actually occurring, but may require the re-direction re-location or the placing
of a barrier to comply with subsection 19(4);
(d) require lighting used to illuminate any area for emergency, security or public
safety purposes to be turned off any time the illumination is necessary for those
purposes, but may require the re-direction, re-location or the placing of a barrier
to comply with subsection 19(4).
SWIMMING POOLS, TREES, WALKWAYS, PARKING LOTS, ETC.
Swimming Pools
20(1) The water in a privately owned swimming pool shall be kept clean and in a sanitary
condition free from obnoxious odours.
Trees
20(2) A tree that is dead, or part of a tree that is dead, or in a decayed or damaged
condition and that may be hazardous to persons or property, shall be removed.
[As Amended: By-law 19-100]
Walkways, Parking Lots, Etc.
20(3) The principal entrance of a building shall be accessed by a walkway leading to a road
allowance or another hard-surfaced area, such as a driveway, leading to a road
allowance.
20(4) Concrete wheel stops shall be installed where parking spaces are adjacent to a property
line to protect fences and adjoining properties from damage.
20(5) An area used for vehicle traffic or parking shall be paved with bituminous, concrete or
equivalent surfacing or surfaced with crushed stone or other suitable and reasonably
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 17
dust-free substance, and shall be maintained so as to properly perform its intended
function.
20(6) The surfaces of walkways, driveways, parking lots and similar areas of a yard shall be
maintained so as to afford safe passage under their normal use.
20(7) Crushed stone surfaces shall be maintained free of dust and spillover onto sidewalks or
grass surfaces.
STORM WATER, ETC.
21(1) Storm water, including storm water discharged from a roof, shall be drained so as to
prevent recurrent standing water, erosion or other damage on the property or on an
adjoining property.
[As Amended: By-law 13-127, s.2]
21(2) Discharge from a sump pump or an air conditioner shall not be permitted to discharge
on adjoining property, a sidewalk, road allowance or stairway.
21(3) An eavestrough or downspout shall be maintained:
(a) watertight and free from leaks;
(b) free from any obstructions;
(c) in a stable condition, securely fastened to the building or structure it drains; and
(d) so as to properly perform its intended function.
FENCES, BARRIERS AND RETAINING WALLS
22(1) A fence, barrier, including a visual barrier, or retaining wall shall be maintained so as
to properly perform its intended function.
22(2) (a) The owner of a property with a building containing 3 or more dwelling units, used
as a dwelling or used for commercial, institutional or industrial purposes shall
install and maintain a visual barrier between their property and an adjoining
property where their property is used for:
(i) the parking, access or egress of vehicles by tenants, employees or
customers;
(ii) the operation of equipment;
(iii) the storage of goods; or
(iv) an exterior bulk or roll-off container disposal system.
(b) A visual barrier under paragraph 22(2)(a) shall be:
(i) required for the uses listed in subparagraphs 22(2)(a)(i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) to
the extent that the uses can be seen from the finished ground level of the
adjoining property;
(ii) not less than 1.2 m in height for the uses listed in subparagraphs
22(2)(a)(i), (ii) and (iii);
(iii) not less than 2 m in height for the use listed in subparagraph 22(2)(a)(iv).
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 18
(c) For the purposes of this subsection "adjoining property" means a property that:
(i) contains at least one dwelling unit; and
(ii) is not used for a commercial, institutional or industrial purpose, except if
such purpose is a home business as defined in the City's zoning by-laws.
(d) No visual barrier under paragraph 22(2)(a) shall be required within 3 m of a front
property line or in contravention of any other applicable by-law.
22(3) Where a zoning by-law, site plan or subdivision agreement entered into under the
Planning Act requires a visual barrier, the requirement in such zoning by-law, site plan
or subdivision agreement prevails in the event of a conflict with subsection 22(2).
[As Amended: By-law 11-111 s. 29, 30]
GARAGES
23(1) A garage shall be so maintained as to prevent gas fumes and carbon monoxide from
entering a dwelling or a dwelling unit.
WASTE DISPOSAL
24(1) A waste storage area, including a waste chute, disposal rooms, containers and
receptacles shall be washed down, disinfected and maintained as is necessary to be
clean and odour free.
[As Amended: By-law 21-144]
24(2) Subject to subsection 24(3), a waste chute in a building containing 3 or more dwelling
units shall be maintained in operation at all times.
24(3) A waste chute in a building containing 3 or more dwelling units shall not be closed to
use except when:
(a) such action is necessary in order to safely make repairs, replacements or
alterations, and then only during the reasonable minimum time that such action is
necessary; or
(b) (i) the owner provides a waste storage area on each floor of the building and
daily collection of waste from such waste storage areas; and
(ii) the occupants are not required to deliver waste to the ground floor,
basement or parking lot of the building; or
(c) the owner has a current and valid permit to close a waste chute issued by the
Director.
[As Amended: By-law 11-057, s 1, By-law 21-144]
ELEVATORS
25(1) An elevator shall comply with the Technical Standards and Safety Act, 2000 and its
regulations as enforced by the Technical Standards and Safety Authority.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 19
25(2) (a) Paragraph 25 (2) (b):
(i) applies to elevators in a building that contains one or more dwelling units;
and
(ii) does not apply to firefighters’ elevators under the Fire Code
(b) Elevators shall be maintained in operation at all times except for such reasonable
time as may be required for repair or replacement as follows:
(i) elevator, where one elevator is provided and there is not firefighters’
elevator;
(i) one elevator where two or more elevators are provided and there is a
firefighters’ elevator.
(ii) Two elevators where two or more elevators are provided and there is no
firefighters’ elevator
(c) Where elevators are intended to operate only on certain floors – for example, if a
30 floor building has one elevator operating on floors 1 to 10, a second on floors
11 to 20 and a third on floors 21 to 30 – paragraph 25(2) (b) applies only to
maintaining their operation on those floors
25(3) All elevators, where provided and when in operation, shall:
(i) be kept clean and free of dirt and defacements; and
(ii) have working lighting, elevator buttons, floor indicators and ventilation
[As Amended: By-law 16-093 s. 1]
25(4) (a) where an owner fails to maintain one or more elevators in a building in
accordance with subsection 25(1) or subsection 25(2) and then fails to do so
again within six months, the owner shall install permanent signs as may be
required by a property standards order.
(b) a permanent sign required under paragraph 25(4) (a) shall, at a minimum:
(i) set out the telephone numbers for the building owner and City of Hamilton
Municipal Law Enforcement Section to be called when an elevator is
inoperative;
(ii) be installed:
1. at each exterior elevator button panel on the main floor of the building
and at each elevator button panel within each elevator;
2. in a position where the sign may readily be seen and read; and
3. with the center line of one sign between 1475 mm and 1525 mm (58
in. and 60 in.) above the finished floor; and
4. a second sign with the center line of the sign between 1170 mm and
1220 mm (46 in and 48 in,) above the finished floor; and
(iii) be in large print (Arial 24 or Verdana 24 font, or more), in black type on a
white background and in Uncontracted Braille (formally known as Grade 1
Braille)
[As Amended: By-law 16-262 S. 1]
PESTS
26(1) A dwelling or a dwelling unit shall be kept free of infestation by pests.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 20
26(2) The owner of a property located within the urban boundary of the City as defined in the
Official Plan or Official Plans for the City shall keep the property free of infestation by
pests.
26(3) For the purposes of subsections 26(1) and 26(2), an "infestation" includes the presence
of one rat or mouse, and in the case of bed bugs, fleas, wasps, hornets, ant or
cockroaches means the presence of more than one such insect, and in the case of
wasps or hornets includes the presence of any occupied nest inside or attached to the
exterior of a building, structure or other erection.
[As Amended: By-law 16-161 s. 2]
OCCUPANCY STANDARDS
27(1) No room or space within a building shall be used for a purpose that is not compliant with
the Building Code and applicable zoning by-laws.
27(2) A living room, dining room, kitchen, and bedroom shall have a minimum room height of
not less than;
(a) 1.9 m over the required floor area and in any location that would normally be
used as a means of egress; or
(b) 2 meters over at least 50% of the required floor area,
provided that any part of the floor having a clear height of less than 1.4 m shall not
be considered in computing the required floor area.
2
27(3) A bedroom for one person shall have a floor area of at least 5.6 m and a bedroom for
2
two or more persons shall have a floor area of at least 3.3 m per person, calculated by
the measurement of such bedroom from the inside faces of its walls, exclusive of the floor
area of any closet or other storage space and subject to subsection 27(4) below.
27(4) A bedroom shall have a minimum width of 1.8 m.
PROPERTY STANDARDS ORDER
28(1) If, after inspection, an officer is satisfied that in some respect the property does not
conform with the standards prescribed in this By-law, he or she may issue an order and
such order shall be served on the owner of the property and may be served on such
other persons affected by it as the officer determines and a copy of the order may be
posted on the property.
28(2) The order referred to in subsection 28(1) shall:
(a) state the municipal address or the legal description of the property;
(b) give reasonable particulars of the repairs to be made or state that the property
is to be cleared of all buildings, structures or debris and left in a graded and
levelled condition, provided that no order in respect of a Part IV heritage property
or a Part V heritage property shall state that any building or structure is to be
altered or cleared, including but not limited to removed, demolished or relocated;
(c) indicate the time for complying with the terms and conditions of the order and
give notice that, if the repair or clearance is not carried out within that time, the
municipality may carry out the repair or clearance at the owner's expense;
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 21
(d) indicate the final date for giving notice of appeal from the order; and
(e) be served or caused to be served:
(i) by personal service; or
(ii) by prepaid registered mail sent to the last known address of the person
to whom notice is to be given or to that person's agent for service.
28(3) For the purposes of paragraph 28(2)(e)(ii), "last known address" of the owner includes
but is not limited to the address provided to the City for the payment of property taxes
for the property or the address for service on the title document for the property.
APPEAL OF A PROPERTY STANDARDS ORDER
29(1) An owner or occupant who has been served with a property standards order and who
is not satisfied with the terms or conditions of the order may appeal to the Committee
by sending a notice of appeal, including grounds for the appeal and the applicable fee
as set out in the User Fees and Charges By-law, by registered mail to the secretary of
the Committee within 14 days after being served with the order.
29(2) A property standards order that is not appealed within the time referred to in
subsection 29(1) is deemed to be confirmed.
29(3) If an appeal is taken, the Committee shall hear the appeal and shall have all the
powers and functions of the officer who made the property standards order and
may,
(a) confirm, modify or rescind the order to demolish or repair;
(b) extend the time for complying with the order,
if, in the Committee's opinion, the general intent and purpose of this By-law are
maintained.
29(4) (a) For the purposes of this By-law, where any portion of a fence or retaining wall:
(i) does not conform to the standards under this By-law; and
(ii) is located touching or on the property line between adjoining properties
at the adjacent finished ground level,
that portion of the fence or retaining wall is deemed to be owned in equal shares by
the owners of the adjoining properties.
(b) Where available, the most recent survey obtained under subsection 31(5) in
accordance with the Surveys Act showing a fence or retaining wall shall be
deemed to be conclusive evidence of the location of the fence or retaining wall.
(c) Despite paragraphs 29(4)(a) and (b), where provision is made for ownership
of or responsibility for a fence or retaining wall that touches or is on the
property line between adjoining properties under a City by-law other than this
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 22
By-law or under any other City Council approved document, then that
provision applies for the purposes of this By-law.
(d) In this subsection, "for the purposes of this By-law" includes but is not limited to
for the purposes of a hearing before and decision of the Committee under section
29 and for the purposes of a determination of the amount of a lien under
subsection 30(8).
29(5) The City or an owner or occupant or person affected by a decision under subsection
29(3) may appeal to a Judge of the Superior Court of Justice, who has the same
powers and functions as the Committee, by notifying the City Clerk in writing and
by applying to the Superior Court of Justice for an appointment within 14 days after
the sending of a copy of the decision.
29(6) A property standards order that is deemed to be confirmed or modified by the
Committee or Judge, shall be final and binding upon the owner and occupant who
shall carry out the repair or demolition within the time and in the manner specified in
the order.
COMPLIANCE
30(1) An owner or occupant of a property shall:
(a) comply with all standards prescribed in this By-law;
(b) comply with a property standards order or any other order made under this By-
law;
(c) ensure that compliance with this By-law is carried out in a manner that avoids
conditions dangerous to the owner, occupants or visitors to the property or that
adequate warning is given where such dangerous conditions are unavoidable.
Offences and Fines
30(2) Every person who fails to comply with a final and binding order issued under this by-law
is guilty of an offence, and on conviction is liable to the penalty or penalties as set out
in the Building Code Act, 1992.
[As Amended: By-law 19-138, s.3]
Power of City to Repair or Demolish
30(4) If the owner or occupant of a property fails to comply with a final and binding property
standards order, the City may cause the property to be repaired or demolished in
accordance with such order.
30(5) The City or a person acting on its behalf is not liable to compensate the owner, occupant
or any other person by reason of anything done by or on behalf of the municipality in
the reasonable exercise of its powers under subsection 30(4).
30(6) Despite subsection 30(4), no building or structure on a Part IV heritage property or a Part
V heritage property may be altered or cleared, including but not limited to removed,
demolished or relocated, except in accordance with the Ontario Heritage Act.
30(7) Where the cost of doing the work necessary for compliance with the property standards
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 23
order under subsection 30(4):
(a) does not exceed $20,000, the Director is authorized to carry out the work;
(b) does exceed $20,000, the Director shall seek authorization from City Council to
carry out the work.
30(8) Upon completion of the work necessary for compliance with the property standards
order under subsection 30(4), the City shall have a lien on the property for the amount
spent on the repair or demolition and the amount shall have priority lien status as
described in section 1 of the Municipal Act, 2001 which, amongst other things, means
the amount may be added to the tax roll for the property and collected in the same
manner as property taxes.
Certificate of Compliance
30(9) When, after an inspection, an officer is of an opinion that a property is in compliance
with this By-law:
(a) an owner of the property shall; or
(b) any other person may,
be issued a certificate of compliance upon submitting a completed application form and
paying the applicable fee as set out in the User Fees and Charges By-law.
Registration of Property Standards Order
30(10) A final and binding property standards order may be registered in the land registry office
on title to the property to which it applies and, upon such registration, any person
acquiring any interest in the property subsequent to the registration of the order shall
be deemed to have been served with the order on the day on which the order was
served under section 28.
30(11) Where an officer determines there is compliance under this By-law with a property
standards order issued and registered on the title to a property, the Director on behalf
of the City Clerk shall forthwith register in the land registry office a certificate that such
requirements have been satisfied, which shall operate as a discharge of such order.
30(12) An owner or occupant may apply for a discharge of a property standards order issued
and registered on title to a property by submitting a completed application form and
paying the applicable fee as set out in the User Fees and Charges By-law and where,
upon inspection of the property by an officer, compliance with the order is found, the
discharge shall be registered by the Director on behalf of the City Clerk.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Director and Officers
31(1) The Director is assigned the responsibility of administering and enforcing this By-law
and the applicable provisions of the Building Code and may assign duties to such
persons as necessary to carry out administration and enforcement of this By-law and
the applicable provisions of the Building Code.
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 24
31(2) Persons appointed or assigned the responsibility of administering or enforcing this By-
law and the applicable provisions of the Building Code are officers, and have the
authority to carry out such responsibilities.
Rights To Enter And To Inspect
31(3) An officer acting under this By-law may, at any reasonable time and upon producing
proper identification, enter upon a property without a warrant for the purpose of
inspecting the property to determine:
(a) whether the property conforms with the standards prescribed in this By-law, or
(b) whether a property standards order has been complied with.
31(4) Despite subsections 31(3), an officer shall not enter or remain in any room or place
actually used as a dwelling unless:
(a) the consent of the occupant is obtained, the occupant first having been informed
that the right of entry may be refused and entry made only under the authority of
a warrant issued under the Building Code;
(b) a warrant issued under the Building Code is obtained;
(c) the delay necessary to obtain the consent of the occupant or a warrant would
result in immediate danger to the health or safety of any person;
(d) the entry is necessary to terminate a danger under subsection 15.7(3) of the
Building Code; or
(e) the entry is necessary to repair or demolish under subsection 30(4) and,
within a reasonable time before entering the room or place to be repaired or
demolished, the officer serves the occupant with notice of his or her intention
to enter it.
31(5) For the purposes of an inspection under subsection 31(3), an officer may,
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things, including
drawings or specifications, that may be relevant to the property or any part
thereof;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the property or part
thereof for the purpose of making copies or extracts;
(c) require information from any person concerning a matter related to a property or
part thereof;
(d) be accompanied by a person who has special or expert knowledge in relation to
a property or part thereof;
(e) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert
knowledge, make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs
necessary for the purposes of the inspection; and
(f) order the owner of the property to take and supply at the owner's expense such
tests and samples as are specified in the order.
31(6) Any cost incurred by the City in exercising its authority to inspect under paragraph
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 25
31(5) including but not limited to the cost of any examination, test, sample or
photograph necessary for the purposes of the inspection, shall be paid by the owner
or occupant of the property where the inspection takes place.
31(7) An employee or agent of the City may enter property at any reasonable time without
a warrant for the purposes of causing the property to be repaired or demolished
pursuant to s. 30(4) in accordance with a final and binding property standards order.
Property Standards Committee
31(8) A Committee to be known as the Property Standards Committee of the City of
Hamilton is established.
31(9) The Committee shall consist of 5 residents of, or property owners in the City, to be
appointed by Council with a 4-year term, or such shorter term as may be determined
by Council.
31(10) Despite subsection 31(9), a member of the Committee shall hold office until his or her
successor has been appointed.
31(11) Any vacancy on the Committee shall be filled forthwith.
SEVERANCE AND CONFLICT
32(1) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this By-law
invalid, such provision or provisions are deemed to be severable and it is the intention
of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to be in force
32(2) Where a provision of this By-law conflicts with the provision of another by-law, Act or
regulation in force within the City, the provision that establishes the higher standard to
protect the health and safety of persons prevails.
ORDERS, PROCEEDINGS AND OTHER ACTIONS CONTINUED
33(1) Any order issued, proceeding being conducted or other action being carried out
under By-law No. 03-117 shall be deemed to continue under this By-law, and any
reference to By-law No. 03-117 in such order, proceeding or other action shall be
deemed to refer to this By-law.
REPEAL AND COMING INTO FORCE
34(1) By-law No. 03-117 is repealed as of the day on which this By-law comes into
force. 34(2) This By-law comes into force on the date of its passing.
PASSED this 13th day of August, 2021.
F. Eisenberger A. Holland
Mayor City Clerk
Property Standards By-law 10-221 (amended August 2021) Page 26



Content from 10260 vacant building registry bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 25, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report; 10-020 (PED09031 (c))
CM: October 13, 2010
Bil No. 260
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO.1 0-260
VACANT BUILDING REGISTRY BY-LAW
Being a by-law to regulate vacant buildings.
WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act. 2001 authorize the City of
Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or desirable for municipal purposes, and in
particular paragraphs 5, 6, 8 and 10 of subsection 10(2) authorize by-laws respecting
the economic, social and environmental well-being of the municipality; the health, safety
and well-being of persons, the protection of persons and property; and structures;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act. 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton
to pass by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of
Hamilton passed under that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act. 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton,
amongst other things, to delegate its authority, to impose fees or charges on persons for
services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of it, to provide for inspections
and inspection orders, and to make orders to discontinue activity or to do work;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
SHORT TITLE
1. This By-law may be referred to as the "Vacant Building Registry By-law" or the
"Hamilton Vacant Building Registry By-law".
DEFINITIONS
2. In this By-law:
"building" means all or part of:
(a) a structure occupying an area greater than 10m2 consisting of a wall, roof
and floor or any of them or a structural system serving the function thereof
including all plumbing, works, fixtures and service systems appurtenant
thereto; or
(b) a structure occupying an area of 10m2 or less that contains plumbing,
including the plumbing appurtenant thereto;
Vacant Building Registry By-law
Page 2 of 7
"business day" means any day from 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on which the City of
Hamilton's administration buildings are open for business;
"City" means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic area of
the City of Hamilton as the context requires;
"Director" means the City's Director of Municipal Law Enforcement and his or
her designate or successor;
"farm" means an agricultural operation as defined in the Farminq and Food
Production Protection Act 1998 and includes such an operation that is not carried
with the expectation of gain but otherwise meets the definition in that Act;
"officer" means an individual appointed by the City of Hamilton or assigned by
the Director to enforce this By-law;
"owner" includes, but is not limited to:
(a) the registered owner of the property on which a building is situated;
(b) the owner of a building;
the person managing or receiving the rent of the property on which a
(c)
building is situated or of a building, or who would receive the rent if the
property or building were let, whether on the person's own account or as
agent or trustee or receiver of any other person;
(d) any
a vendor of a building under an agreement for sale who has paid
municipal taxes on the building after the effective date of the agreement;
the person for the time being receiving instalments of the purchase price if
(f)
a building were sold under an agreement for sale;
(g) a lessee or occupant of the property on which a building is situated who,
under the terms of a lease, is required to repair and maintain the building;
and
(h) an owner as defined by the Condominium Act. 1998;
"person" includes, but is not limited to, an individual, sole proprietorship,
partnership, association or corporation;
"property" means the land on which a building is situated and includes the
building; and,
Vacant BUilding Registry By-law
Page 3 of 7
"vacant building" means a building that is not completely or not substantially
completely occupied by the owner or a person authorized by the owner for more
than 90 consecutive days, but does not include a building:
(a) containing 1, 2 or 3 dwelling units provided that each dwelling unit is fit for
an individual or individuals to live in, in accordance with all applicable
statutes, regulations and by-laws;
(b) occupied by the owner or a person authorized by the owner on a seasonal
basis;
(c) a building, except a dwelling unit, on property used as a farm; or
(d) that is City owned.
REGISTRATION
3. Every owner of a vacant building shall register the vacant building with the
Director within 30 days of October 13, 2010.
4. Every owner of a vacant building that commences to be vacant after October 13,
2010 shall register the vacant building with the Director within 30 days of the date
the vacant building commences to be vacant.
5. Every registration expires:
(a) on the one year anniversary date of the date on which it is issued if the
registration is not renewed before its expiry;
(b) when the registration is revoked under this By-law;
(c) when the vacant building is sold or otherwise transferred to a new owner;
when the Director is satisfied, as set out in a written notice from the
(d)
Director to the owner of the vacant building, that the building is no longer
vacant.
6. To register or to renew a registration, the owner of a vacant building shall:
complete and submit to the Director an application containing such
(a)
information as the Director may require; and,
submit the registration fee.
(b)
7. Every owner of a vacant building shall notify the Director of any change in
circumstances in connection with information given to the Director under section
6 within 10 business days after the change occurs.
Vacant Building Registry By-law
Page 4 of 7
8. The Director shall refuse an application under section 6 when the application is
incomplete or contains false or misleading information.
REGULATIONS
9. Every owner of a vacant building shall:
(a) ensure that the property complies with all applicable statutes, regulations
and by-laws, including but not limited to the Buildinq Code Act. 1992, the
Fire Protection and Prevention Act. 1997, the Property Standards By-law
and the Yard Maintenance By-law;
(b) satisfy the Director that an individual retained by the owner attends at the
property to monitor the building condition a minimum of once every 2
weeks or more frequently as required in writing by the Director; and,
provide a report from a qualified individual as to the condition of the
(c)
building as required in writing by the Director.
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
10. The Director is authorized to administer and enforce this By-law including but not
limited to prescribing the format and content of any forms or other documents
required under this By-law.
11. Registration and other fees under this By-law shall be as set out and approved by
Council from time to time under the User Fees and Charges By-law.
12. An officer may enter on a property at any reasonable time for the purpose of
carrying out an inspection to determine whether or not the following are being
complied with:
(a) this By-law;
(b) a direction or order made under this By-law; or,
(c) an order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
13. An officer may, for the purposes of the inspection under section 12:
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the
purpose of making copies or extracts;
Vacant Building Registry By-law
Page 5 of 7
require information in writing or otherwise as required by the Officer from
(c)
any person concerning a matter related to the inspection; or,
(d) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert
knowledge, make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs
necessary for the purposes of the inspection.
14. Any cost incurred by the City in exercising its authority to inspect under section 13
including but not limited to the cost of any examination, test, sample or
photograph necessary for the purposes of the inspection, shall be paid by the
owner of the property where the inspection takes place.
15. An officer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an order issued by a
provincial judge or justice of the peace under Section 438 of the Municipal Act,
2001 where he or she has been prevented or is likely to be prevented from
carrying out an inspection under sections 12 and 13.
16. If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she
contravened the By-law or who
may make an order requiring the person who
caused or permitted the contravention or the owner of the property on which the
contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening activity.
17. An order under Section 16 shall set out:
reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
(a)
contravention and the location of the propert on which the contravention
occurred; and,
(b) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
18. If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she
may make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who
caused or permitted the contravention or the owner of the property on which the
contravention occurred to do work to correct the contravention.
19. An order under section 18 shall set out:
reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the
(a)
contravention and the location of the property on which the contravention
occurred;
the work to be completed; and,
(b)
(c) the date or dates by which the work must be completed.
Vacant Building Registry By-law
. Page 6 of 7
20. An order to discontinue contravening activity made under Section 16 or an order
to do work made under Section 18 may be served personally or by registered
mail to the last known address of:
(a) the owner of the property where the contravention occurred; and,
(b) such other persons affected by it as the officer making the order determines.
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place 5 business days
after the date of mailing.
21. In addition to service given in accordance with section 20, an order to discontinue
contravening activity made under section 16 or an order to do work made under
section 18 may be served by an officer placing a placard containing the order in a
conspicuous place on the property where the contravention occurred.
22. Where service cannot be given in accordance with section 20, sufficient service
is deemed to have taken place when given in accordance with section 21.
23. Where a person does not comply with a direction, an order or a requirement
under this By-law to do a matter or thing, the Director, with such assistance by
others as may be required, may carry out such direction, order or requirement at
the person's expense.
24. The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under section 23 by
action or by adding the costs to the tax roil and collecting them in the same
manner as property taxes and such costs shall include an interest rate of 15 per
cent per year commencing on the day the City incurs the costs and ending on the
day the costs, including the interest, are paid in fulL.
25. The Director is authorized to give immediate effect to any direction, order or
requirement where the costs of carrying out the direction, order or requirement
do not exceed $10,000 and, where the costs do exceed $10,000, as the City's
Council may authorize.
26. Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is, upon conviction,
guilty of an offence and is liable:
(a) on a first conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000; and,
(b) on any subsequent conviction, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
27. Despite section 26, where the person convicted is a corporation:
(a) the maximum fine in subsection 26(a) is $50,000; and,
(b) the maximum fine in subsection 26(b) is $100,000.
Vacant Building Registry By-law
Page 7 of 7
28. Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the
conviction has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter
may, in addition to any other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law,
make an order prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the offence by the
person convicted.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
29. All measurements in this By-law are given in the metric short form.
30. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this By-
law invalid, it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall
continue to be in force.
ENACTMENT
31. This By-law comes into force on the date of its passing.
ED this13th day of October, 2010



Content from 10288 to amend zoning bylaw no 05200pdf:
Authority: Item 33, Economic Development
and Planning Committee
Report 10-020
(PEDI 01 53a/FCS10062a/PWI 0080)
CM: October 13, 201 0
Bill No. 288
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-288
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District
for the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton has in force several Zoning By-laws which apply
to the different areas incorporated into the City by virtue of the City of Hamilton
Act. 1999, S.O. 1999, Chap. 14;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is the lawful successor to the former
Municipalities identified in Section 1.7 of By-law 05-200;
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to enact a new Zoning By-law to comprehensively
deal with zoning throughout the City;
AND WHEREAS the said new comprehensive Zoning By-law is being enacted
and is coming into force and effect in several stages;
AND WHEREAS, the first stage of the Zoning By-law, being By-law 05-200,
came into force on May 25, 2005;
AND WHEREAS this By-law represents the fourth stage of the Zoning By-law to
create new Industrials Zones, amending certain provisions of By-law 05-200 and,
applying to the Airport Employment Growth District within the Urban Area of the
City, as hereinafter described and depicted;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. That SECTION 2: INTERPRETATION of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended
as follows:
a) That Section 2.1 d) - Industrial Classification is amended by adding
the letter "s" to the word "Zone" in the heading;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 2 of 37
That Section 2.1 d) - lndustrial Classification is amended by adding
the following Zones and Zone Symbols following the words
"Research and Development Zone, MI" :
"Airside Industrial Zone M7
Airport Related Business Zone M8
Airport Reserve Zone M9
Airport Light Industrial Zone MI0
Airport Prestige Business Park Zone MIA"
2. That SECTION 3: DEFINITIONS of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended as
foIlows:
a) That the following new definitions be added:
"Agricultural Greenhouse
Shall mean the use of land, building,
structure or part thereof, for the controlled
growth of plants, which may include but
shall not be limited to flowers, vegetables
and fruit, and shall not permit commercial
sales.
Airport Waste Processing Facility
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sorting
and processing of airport waste and
recyclable materials and for which a
Certificate of Approval for such purpose
under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act is required. An Airport
Waste Processing Facilities shall include
but not be limited to: thermal treatment,
blue box recyclable recovery facilities,
open-air or in-vessel organics
processing, wood waste recycling and/or
a co-generation energy facility, but shall
not include a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
Airport Waste Transfer Facility
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure or part thereof, for the
temporary storage and collection of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 3 of 37
airport waste and for which a Certificate
of Approval for such purpose under Part
V of the Environmental Protection Act is
required. An Airport Waste Transfer
Facility may also include limited sorting
of such waste prior to its transport.
Building and Lumber Supply Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for a retail store
predominantly selling a combination of
lumber and a wide range of building and
home decorating supplies along with
ancillary sales of construction tools,
gardening products, and home design
products.
Building or Contracting Supply Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, in which
building, construction or home
improvement materials are warehoused
and which may include accessory retail.
Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the bulk
storage or wholesale distribution of
gasoline, oil, petroleum products or other
flammable liquids, but shall not include a
Motor Vehicle Service Station or a Motor
Vehicle Gas Bar.
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental and Service
Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where
commercial motor vehicles or parts for
such vehicles are stored and displayed
for the purpose of sale, lease, rental or
repair.
Contractor's Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building,
structure, or part thereof, by a contractor,
for the storage and maintenance of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 4 of 37
equipment used by the contractor, but
shall not include a Salvage Yard.
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental and Service
Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display,
sale, lease, rental or repair of
commercial, industrial, farm or
agricultural equipment and machinery
and which may include facilities for the
storage and sale of parts accessory to
such equipment and machinery, together
with the repair, painting and service of
such equipment and machinery.
Farm Product Supply Dealer
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sale
and/or storage of seeds, fertilizers, farm
equipment or other goods or materials
used in agriculture.
Hazardous Waste Management Facility
Shall mean a Waste Transfer Facility, a
Waste Processing Facility or a Waste
Disposal Facility that handles Hazardous
Waste and for which a Certificate of
Approval for such purpose under Part V
of the Environmental Protection Act is
required. A Hazardous Waste
Management Facility may also include
the storage, transfer or processing of
non-hazardous waste.
Hazardous Waste Shall mean materials that are defined as
Hazardous Waste under Ontario
Regulation 347 to the Environmental
Protection Act.
Home Furnishings Retail Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the sale or
rental of home furnishings and related
supplies, materials or fixtures.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 5 of 37
Industrial Administrative Office
Shall mean an office for the management
or administration of Manufacturing
establishments.
Labour Association Hall
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, as a meeting
place by labour or trade unions and
which is operated for the exclusive use of
members and their guests and is not
open to the general public on an equal
basis, and which may include but not be
limited to administrative offices, training
facilities and meeting rooms. A Labour
Association Hall may also include a
Trade School.
Landscape Contracting Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where soil,
mulch, rock, screening and other similar
landscape materials are stored and
offered for sale on a wholesale basis,
and which may include but not be limited
to the storage of related equipment.
Accessory snow removal equipment and
storage shall also be permitted.
Major Recreational Vehicle Sales and Service Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display
and retail sale of travel trailers,
recreational vehicles and boats and
which may include but not be limited to
the servicing, repair, cleaning, painting,
polishing and greasing of such vehicles,
trailers and boats and the sale of
accessories and related products and the
leasing or renting of such vehicles, but
shall not include a Motor Vehicle Sales
and Service Establishment.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 6 of 37
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the repair of
damage to a motor vehicle caused by
collision, accident, corrosion or age, and
which may also include the
reconstruction of motor vehicles, the
painting or repainting of motor vehicles,
the rebuilding or conversion of
automotive engines or engine parts and
which may also include an accessory
Towing Establishment, but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Gas Bar, Motor
Vehicle Service Station, Motor Vehicle
Washing Establishment or Motor Vehicle
Wrecking Establishment.
Motor Vehicle Stacking Space
Shall mean an area devoted to the
waiting or queuing of motor vehicles
accessing a drive through facility,
separate from any aisle providing access
to and from any parking area.
Motor Vehicle Wrecking Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the storage,
dismantling, crushing or demolition of
unlicensed, inoperable or derelict Motor
Vehicles or Commercial Motor Vehicles
and which may include the storage and
sale of salvaged material or parts
obtained therefrom, but shall not include
a Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment, Motor Vehicle Service
Station, Motor Vehicle Washing
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
Private Power Generation Facility
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the
generation and transmission of heat,
steam or electricity, and which may
include the sale of electricity back into
the grid, but shall not include a Waste
Management Facility.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 7 of 37
Salvage Yard Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for storing,
wrecking, dismantling, processing,
recycling and selling used goods, wares,
materials and which may include, but not
be limited to household items, clothing,
furniture, paper, bottles, building
materials, scrap metal, machinery, heavy
equipment or parts thereof, and shall
include but not be limited to a Motor
Vehicle Wrecking Establishment. A
Salvage Yard shall not include a Waste
Management Facility.
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or Design Business
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof in which
professionals in the field of surveying,
engineering, planning or design provide
technical consultation, analysis, advisory
or administrative services.
Thermal Treatment Shall mean the processing of Waste into
a waste-based fuel and/or the disposal of
Waste under controlled conditions by
heating or combusting the materials and
shall include refuse derived fuel
manufacturing and energy from waste
activities.
Towing Establishment Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the keeping
of tow trucks, and to which disabled or
impounded motor vehicles or mobile
equipment are taken or towed and stored
temporarily until reclaimed, but shall not
include a Motor Vehicle Wrecking
Establishment or a Salvage Yard.
Trade School Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, in which
specialized instruction in a skilled trade is
provided and which may include but not
be limited to construction, industrial and
motive power trades and Commercial
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 8 of 37
Motor Vehicle training and which is
operated on a financial profit basis, but
shall not include a Commercial School or
an Educational Establishment.
Transport Terminal Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, where
Commercial Motor Vehicles, trucks,
trailers, rail cars or containers are
loaded, unloaded, temporarily stored,
dispatched or parked for remuneration
and may include freight handling facilities
related to the trans-shipment of goods,
materials or products.
Travel Plaza Shall mean the use of land, building,
structure, or part thereof, catering to the
goods movement industry and the
traveling public. In addition to the sale of
fuels for motor vehicles, recreational
vehicles, commercial motor vehicles and
heavy motor vehicles and propane
dispensing, a Travel Plaza may include a
retail store, a restaurant, drivers lounge
and personal service uses accessory and
subordinate to the Travel Plaza function.
Travel Plaza component uses may
include, among other things, motor
vehicle, recreational vehicle, commercial
motor vehicle and heavy motor vehicle
parking, a weigh scale, a garage -
industrial, and a recreational vehicle,
commercial motor vehicle and heavy
motor vehicle washing establishment.
Waste Shall mean materials that are defined as
Waste under Part V of the Environmental
Protection Act."
That the definition of Communications Establishment be
amended:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 9 of 37
by deleting the words "an establishment used" between the words
"Shall mean" and "for the broadcasting" and replacing it with the
words "the use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by adding the words "and production" between the words "for the
broadcasting" and "of information through".
That the definition of Computer, Electronic and Data Processing
Establishment be amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment used for" between the
words "Shall mean" and "for the research" and replacing it with the
words "the use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by deleting the words "and/" between the words "of electronic
equipment" and "or software.".
That the definition of Lot Line, Side Lot Line be amended by
adding the words "The Hypotenuse of a Daylight Triangle shall also
be a side lot line." after the words "or rear lot line.".
That the definition of Motor Vehicle Service Station be amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment used" between the words
"Shall mean" and "for the sale" and replacing it with the words "the
use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,";
by deleting the words "and/" between the words "automotive
accessories" and "or convenience goods,";
by adding the word "Establishment," between the words "Collision
Repair" and "Motor Vehicle Sales";
by adding the word "Establishment," between the words "Sales and
Service" and "Motor Vehicle"; and,
by deleting the term "Motor Vehicle Car Wash" and replacing it with
the term "Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment".
That the definition of Office be amended:
by adding the words "and shall include but not be limited to an
Industrial Administrative Office and a Surveying, Engineering,
Planning or Design Business," between the words "offered or
performed" and "but shall not include"; and,
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 10 of 37
by deleting the word "a" between the words "Medical Clinic or" and
"Medical Office".
That the definition of Planned Business Centre be amended by
adding the words ", and where each business establishment has a
separate entrance located at grade." following the words "for lease
or occupancy".
That the definition of Private Club or Lodge be amended:
by deleting the words "a building or part of a building used"
between the words "Shall mean" and "for social, literary" and
replacing it with the words "the use of land, building or structure, or
part thereof,"; and,
by adding the words "or a Labour Association Hall" following the
words "shall not include a Fitness Club".
That the definition of Science and Technology Establishment be
amended:
by deleting the words "an establishment" between the words "Shall
mean" and "where scientific and" and replacing it with the words
"the use of land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by deleting the words "and/" between the words "development,
manufacturing" and "or technical experimentation".
That the definition of Tradesperson's Shop be amended by
deleting the words "a building" between the words "Shall mean" and
"in which is provided" and replacing it with the words "the use of
land, building or structure, or part thereof,"; and,
by deleting the word "and" between the words "plumbers shop" and
"other shops" and replacing it with the word "or".
That the definition of Transportation Depot be amended:
by adding the words ", building or structure, or part thereof,"
between the words "the use of land" and "where commercial
motor"; and,
by deleting the words "also include" between the words "purpose
and shall" and "courier service facilities" and replacing it with the
words "include but not be limited to".
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 11 of 37
That the definition of "Garden Centre" be deleted and replaced
with the following definition:
"Garden Centre Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the display
and sale of plants, gardening and
landscaping supplies and equipment."
m) That the definition of "Manufacturing" be deleted and replaced
with the following definition:
"Manufacturing Shall mean the production, fabrication,
compounding, processing, packaging,
crafting, bottling, packing, recycling or
assembling of raw or semi-processed or
fully-processed goods or materials, and
shall include but not be limited to a
Biotechnological Establishment,
Computer, Electronic and Data
Processing Establishment,
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment, Printing Establishment
and/or a Science and Technology
Establishment. Manufacturing may also
include a Private Power Generation
Facility as an accessory use, but shall
not include a Waste Management
Facility."
That the definition of "Research and Development
Establishment" be deleted and replaced with the following
definition:
"Research and Development Establishment
Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the purpose
of conducting pure and applied research,
analysis and experimentation in any field
of science, medicine, technology and
manufacturing and shall include but not
be limited to facilities such as lecture
rooms, administrative offices,
laboratories, training facilities, display
rooms, pilot plants, prototypical
manufacturing, simulating equipment and
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 12 of 37
the like, and service and machine shops
to serve the Research and ~evelopment
Establishment. A Research and
Development Establishment shall also
include but not be limited to a
Biotechnological Establishment,
Computer, Electronic and Data
Processing Establishment, Laboratory,
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment, and/or a Science and
Technology Establishment."
That the definition of "Warehouse" be deleted and replaced with
the following definition:
"Warehouse Shall mean the use of land, building or
structure, or part thereof, for the bulk
storage or distribution of goods to
industrial, commercial or institutional
business users or other wholesalers, but
shall not include the retailing of goods to
the general public. A Warehouse shall
not include a Waste Management Facility,
Salvage Yard or Towing Establishment."
That SECTION 4: GENERAL PROVISIONS of By-law 05-200 is hereby
amended as follows:
a) That Section 4.3 FRONTAGE ON A STREET is amended by
adding the following new subsection:
"c) Notwithstanding a) above, any lot with an Industrial Zone
shall not be required frontage on a public road, unless
otherwise stated in this By-law."
That Section 4.12 VACUUM CLAUSE is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
"c) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this By-law, any lot
within the Industrial Zones of this By-law and the location
thereon of any building or structure, existing on the effective
date of this By-law, shall be deemed to comply with the
regulations for any required setbacks, front yard, flankage
yard, rear yard, lot width, lot area and building height and are
permitted by this By-law."
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 13 of 37
That the following new Sections be added:
"4.23 SPECIAL SETBACKS
Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law, the
following Special Setbacks shall apply:
a) Setback from a Provincial Highway Right-of-way
All buildings, structures, required parking areas and
storm water management facilities located on a
property shall be setback a minimum of 14.0 metres
from a Provincial Highway Right-of-way.
b) Setback from a Railway Right-of-way
All buildings or structures within a Residential Zone or
an Institutional Zone shall be setback a minimum of
30.0 metres from a Railway Right-of-way.
c) Setback from a TransCanada Pipeline Right-of-
Way
All buildings or structures located on a property shall
be setback a minimum of 10.0 metres from a
TransCanada Pipeline Right-of-way.
d) Setback from a ConservationIHazard Land (P5)
Zone
All buildings or structures located on a property shall
be setback a minimum of 7.5 metres from a P5 Zone
boundary line.
4.24 CONSERVATION AUTHORITY REGULATION AREA
Lands shown on Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps as "CA
Regulation Area" are subject to additional regulation by the
applicable Conservation Authority. Landowners are advised
to contact the appropriate Conservation Authority prior to
any development or site alteration within the area subject to
the Conservation Authority Regulation in order to determine
approval requirement(s).
These boundaries are intended for information and reference
purposes, and are subject to change from time to time
without requiring amendment to this By-law.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 14 of 37
4.25 DRIVE THROUGH REGULATIONS
a) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this By-law,
every drive through shall provide the following
minimum number of stacking spaces from the service
window:
- 12 spaces
i Restaurant
ii) All other uses - 3 spaces
b) No stacking space shall be less than 2.6 metres in
width by 6.0 metres in length, unless otherwise
provided for in this By-law."
4. That SECTION 5: PARKING of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended as
follows:
a) That Section 5.2 DESIGN STANDARDS is amended by adding the
following new subsection:
"5.2.1 LOCATION OF LOADING FACILITIES
The location of loading doors and associated loading
facilities shall be subject to the following:
a) Shall not be permitted within a Front Yard;
b) Shall not be permitted in any yard abutting a street,
except where screened from view by a Visual Barrier
in accordance with Section 4.19 of this By-law; and,
c) Shall not be permitted in a required yard abutting a
Residential Zone or an Institutional Zone and shall be
screened from view by a Visual Barrier in accordance
with Section 4.19 of this By-law."
b) That Section 5.6 c) Parking Schedule for All Zones, except the
Downtown Zones is amended by adding the following new parking
requirements to subsection iv. Commercial Uses:
Building and Lumber Supply 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Establishment; gross floor area, which
Building or Contracting accommodates the Office, Retail
Supply Establishment and Showroom component of the
use.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 15 of 37
Conference or Convention 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Centre gross floor area, which
c
accommodates such use.
Courier Establishment 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
accommodates Office
component of the use.
Financial Establishment 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Hotel 1 for each guest suite.
Medical Clinic, Medical 1 for each 16.0 square metres of
Office gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Motor Vehicle Service 4 for each service bay.
Station
Office 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
Personal Services 1 for each 16.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
Restaurant i) 1 for each 8.0 square metres
of gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above,
where there are no seats
provided for dining purposes,
a minimum of 3 spaces shall
be required.
Retail 1 for each 20.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
I 1 I
Transportation Depot 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 16 of 37
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use.
Warehouse 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use."
>
c That Section 5.6~)P arking Schedule for All Zones, except the
Downtown Zones is amended by deleting the following parking
requirements in subsection v. Industrial Uses:
"Biotechnological 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
Establishment; gross floor area, which
Communications accommodates such use.
Establishment;
Computer, Electronic and
Data Processing
Establishment;
Laboratory;
Pharmaceutical and Medical
Establishment;
Printing Establishment;
Research and Development
Establishment (not located
in a MI Zone);
Science and Technology
Establishment
Manufacturing; 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Warehouse gross floor area, which
accommodates such use."
d ) That Section 5.6 c) Parking Schedule for All Zones, except the
Downtown Zones is amended by adding the following new parking
requirements to subsection v. Industrial Uses:
"Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use.
Commercial Motor Vehicle 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Sales, Rental and Service gross floor area, which
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 17 of 37
Establishment accommodates such use.
Commercial Motor Vehicle 4 for each service bay.
Washing Establishment
Communications 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
Establishment gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Contractor's Establishment 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Dry Cleaning Plant 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Equipment and Machinery 1 for each 100.0 square metres of
Sales, Rental and Service gross floor area, which
Establishment accommodates such use.
Industrial Administrative 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Offi ce gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Laboratory 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Labour Association Hall 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Landscape Contracting 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Establishment gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Manufacturing 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Office
component of the use, plus 1 for
each 200.0 square metres of gross
floor area, which accommodates
i the remainder of the use.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 18 of 37
Motor Vehicle Collision 1 for each 115 .0 square metres of
Repair Establishment gross floor area, which
accommodates such use.
Planned Business Centre 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
within an Industrial Zone, the gross floor area.
except an M4 Zone
Planned Business Centre i) 1 for each 30.0 square metres
within an M4 Zone of the gross floor area.
ii) In addition to i) above, where a
Restaurant occupies more
than 30 percent of the gross
floor area of the planned
business centre, the specific
parking requirement for the
Restaurant shall be required in
addition to the planned
business centre requirement
for the remaining gross floor
area of the planned business
centre.
iii) In addition to i) above, where a
Medical Office or a Medical
Clinic occupies more than 30
percent of the gross floor area
of the planned business
centre, the specific parking
requirement for the Medical
Office or Medical Clinic shall
be required in addition to the
planned business centre
requirement for the remaining
gross floor area of the planned
business centre.
Private Power Generation ? for each 30.0 square metres of
Facility gross floor area which
accommodates the Office
component of the use.
Repair Service 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 19 of 37
1 1
accommodates the Office, Retail
1 I
I
and Showroom component of the
Research and Development 1 for each 50.0 square metres of
Establishment within an gross floor area which
Industrial Zone, except an accommodates such use.
MI Zone
Y
Salvage Yard 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Office and
Retail component of the use.
Surveying, Engineering, 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
Planning or Design gross floor area which
Business accommodates such use.
Towing Establishment 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use.
Trade School 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates such use.
1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area, which
accommodates the Office, Retail
and Showroom component of the
use.
1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Office
component of the use.
--
Waste Management Facility 1 for each 30.0 square metres of
gross floor area which
accommodates the Off ice
component of the use, plus 1 for
each 200.0 square metres of gross
floor area, which accommodates
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Paae 20 of 37
I
the remainder of the use."
e) That SECTION 5: PARKING of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended by adding
the following new subsection:
"5.7 BICYCLE PARKING
a) Locational Requirements
i) Long-term Bicycle Parking Space shall be located in a
secure enclosed bicycle parking area.
ii) Short-term Bicycle Parking Space shall be located
within a bicycle parking area at grade.
b) For any use within the M7, M8, M9, M10, MA1 Zone, the
following Bicycle Parking requirements shall apply:
i) In addition to 5.6 d) above 5% of the required motor
vehicle parking spaces, shall be provided in the form
of Long-term Bicycle Parking Spaces.
ii) Notwithstanding 5.6 d) above, the required motor
vehicle parking may be reduced 1 space for every 15
square metres of gross floor area of locker, change
room or shower facility specifically accessible to all of
the secure Long-term Bicycle Parking Spaces."
5. That SECTION 9: INDUSTRIAL ZONES of By-law 05-200 is hereby
amended by adding the following new subsections:
9.7 AIRSIDE INDUSTRIAL (M7) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Airside Industrial (M7) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.7.1 PERMITTED USES Airport Storage, Maintenance and
Operation Facilities
Airport Waste Processing Facility
Airport Waste Transfer Facility
Catering Service
Communications Establishment
Courier Establishment
Bulk Fuel and Oil Storage Establishment
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 21 of 37
Industrial Administrative Offices
Manufacturing
Off ice
Private Power Generation Facility
Research and Development
Establishment
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
Warehouse
9.7.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.7.1, the
following types of manufacturing uses
are prohibited, except if these uses
are considered only as an accessory
use to another permitted
manufacturing use:
Agricultural Greenhouse
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Dry Cleaning Plant
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur Products
Outdoor Storage
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber or Plastic
Processing or Refining of Petroleum or
Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage, Recycling or Scrap Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating, Rendering
or Cleaning of Meat, Poultry or
Fish or by-products thereof
Smelting or Extruding of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.7.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 22 of 37
Dwelling Unit
Day Nursery
Rock Crushing Plant
9.7.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Yard Abutting a i) 3.0 metres;
Street
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, where a
property abuts Dickenson Road
West:
1. Minimum Yard - 6.0 metres
2. Maximum Yard - 25.0 metres
c) Maximum Building Height In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.1 7 of this By-law.
d) Built Form for New The minimum length of the ground floor
Development faqade shall be equal to 60% or more of
the measurement of the front lot line.
e) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 10°/0 of total Lot Area;
Requirements
ii) A 3.0 metre wide Landscaped Area
shall be provided and maintained
abutting a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
iii) Notwithstanding ii) above, for
properties abutting Dickenson Road
West a minimum 6.0 metre wide
Landscaped Area shall be provided
and maintained;
f) Location and Screening of i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Outdoor Storage and Assembly shall not be permitted in a
Outdoor Assembly required Front Yard or a required
Flankage Yard;
ii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 23 of 37
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.19 of this By-law.
g) Location of Outdoor Display Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and shall be permitted in a
yard abutting a street, but shall be no
closer than 3.0 metres to the lot line.
h) Maximum Combined Gross 25% of the gross floor area of the
Floor Area for Accessory principal use or 500 square metres gross
Retail and Showroom Area floor area, whichever is the lesser.
i) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
j) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.7.3 of this By-law.
9.8 AIRPORT RELATED BUSINESS fM8) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Related Business (M8) Zone for any purpose
other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such
erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.8.1 PERMITTED USES Catering Service
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial Parking Facility
Conference or Convention Centre
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Financial Establishment
Hotel
Labour Association Hall
Motor Vehicle Rental Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Motor Vehicle Sales and Service
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 24 of 37
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Washing Establishment
Personal Services
Restaurant
Retail
Transportation Depot
Trade School
9.8.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.8.1,
Outdoor Storage is prohibited, even
as an accessory use.
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.8.1, an
Agricultural Greenhouse only as an
accessory use to another permitted
use.
9.8.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres ;
b) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres;
Street
c) Minimum Yard Abutting a 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
Residential Zone or a lot line abutting a property lot line within
Rural Zone a Residential Zone.
d) Maximum Building Height i) In accordance with the regulations
of Section 4.1 7 of this By-law.
ii) 11.0 metres; but shall not exceed
the maximum building height
established by i) above.
ii) The maximum building height may
be equivalently increased as yard
increases beyond minimum yard
requirement established in 9.8.3 c)
above, but shall not exceed the
maximum building height
established by i) above.
e) Maximum Gross Floor 500 square metres;
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 25 of 37
Area for Retail Unit
f) Built form for New The minimum length of the ground floor
Development fa~ades hall be equal to 6O0I0 or more of
the measurement of the front lot line.
g) Landscaped Area Minimum 6.0 metre width shall be
provided and maintained abutting a
street, except for points of ingress and
egress and shall not include outdoor
display;
h) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a Residential
Zone, in accordance with Section 4.19 of
this By-law.
i) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
j) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.8.3 of this By-law;
9.9 AIRPORT RESERVE (M9) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Reserve (M9) Zone for any purpose other than
one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection or
use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.9.1 PERMITTED USES Airport Storage, Maintenance and
Operation Facilities
Uses Existing at the Effective Date of this
By-law
9.9.2 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Yard Abutting a i) 3.0 metres;
Street
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, a minimum
yard of 6.0 metres shall be required
where a property abuts Highway No.
6 or Glancaster Road.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 26 of 37
b) Maximum Building Height In accordance with the requirements of
Section 4.1 7 of this By-law.
c) Landscaped Area i) Minimum 3.0 metre wide Landscaped
Area shall be provided and
maintained abutting a street, except
for points of ingress and egress;
ii) In addition to i) above, for properties
adjacent to Highway No. 6 a
minimum 6.0 metre wide
Landscaped Area shall be provided
and maintained;
d) Location and Screening of i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Outdoor Storage and Assembly shall not be permitted in a
Outdoor Assembly required Front Yard or a required
Flankage Yard;
ii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law
e) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
f) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.9.2 of this By-law.
9.10 AIRPORT INDUSTRIAL fM10) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Industrial (M10) Zone for any purpose other
than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto. Such erection
or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.10.1 PERMITTED USES Animal Shelter
Airport Waste Processing Facility
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 27 of 37
Airport Waste Transfer Facility
Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial School
Communications Establishment
Courier Establishment
Dry Cleaning Plant
Educational Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Industrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Off ice
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Warehouse
9.10 .2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.10.1, the
following types of manufacturing
uses are prohibited, except if these
uses are considered only as an
accessory use to another permitted
manufacturing use:
Agricultural Greenhouse
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur Products
Outdoor Storage
Primary Production of Chemicals,
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 28 of 37
Synthetic Rubber or Plastic
Processing or Refining of Petroleum
or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating,
Rendering or Cleaning of Meat,
Poultry or Fish or by-products
thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Explosives Manufacturing
Pulp and Paper Mills
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.1 0.1, the
following uses are prohibited, even
as accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
Elementary School
High School
Rock Crushing Plant
9.10 .3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 60.0 metres;
c) Minimum Yard Abutting a 3.0 metres;
Street
d) Maximum Building Height In accordance with the regulations of
Section 4.1 7 of this By-law.
e) Built Form Regulations for The minimum length of the ground floor
New Development fa~ades hall be equal to 50% or more of
the measurement of the front lot line.
f) Landscaped Area Minimum 3.0 metre wide Landscaped
Area shall be provided and maintained
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 29 of 37
abutting a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
g) Location and Screening of Outdoor Storage and Outdoor Assembly
Outdoor Storage and of goods, materials or equipment shall be
Outdoor Assembly permitted only as an accessory use and
the following regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not be permitted in a
Front Yard or a required Flankage
Yard;
ii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall not exceed 85% of
the total lot area;
iii) Outdoor Storage and Outdoor
Assembly shall be screened from
view from any abutting street by a
Visual Barrier in accordance with
Section 4.1 9 of this By-law.
h) Location of Outdoor Display Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and shall be permitted in
a yard abutting a street, but shall be no
closer than 3.0 metres to the lot line.
i) Location Restriction of i) In addition to the Regulations of
Airport Waste Processing Section 9.1 0.3, any building,
Facility and Airport Waste structure or land used for an Airport
Transfer Facility Waste Processing Facility or an
Airport Waste Transfer Facility, shall
be located a minimum of 300.0
metres from a Residentially Zoned
or Institutionally Zoned property .lot
line.
ii) In addition to i) above, an Airport
Waste Processing Facility or an
Airport Waste Transfer Facility shall
only be permitted within wholly
enclosed buildings.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 30 of 37
j) Maximum Gross Floor Area An Industrial Administrative Office or a
for Industrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
k) Maximum Combined Gross 25% of the gross floor area of the
Floor Area for Accessory principal use or 500.0 square metres
Retail and Showroom Area gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
I) Parking In accordance with the requirements of
Section 5 of this By-law.
m) Accessory Buildings In accordance with the requirements of
Section 9.1 0.3 of this By-law.
) 1
9.1 1 AIRPORT PRESTIGE BUSINESS PARK (MI 1) ZONE
No person shall erect, or use any building in whole or in part, or use any land in
whole or in part, within an Airport Prestige Business Park (MI 1) Zone for any
purpose other than one or more of the following uses, or uses accessory thereto.
Such erection or use shall also comply with the prescribed regulations:
9.11.1 PERMITTED USES Building and Lumber Supply
Establishment
Building or Contracting Supply
Establishment
Commercial Motor Vehicle Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Commercial School
Communications Establishment
Conference or Convention Centre
Courier Establishment
Educational Establishment
Equipment and Machinery Sales, Rental
and Service Establishment
Hotel
lndustrial Administrative Office
Laboratory
Labour Association Hall
Manufacturing
Motor Vehicle Collision Repair
Establishment
Motor Vehicle Service Station
Ofice
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 31 of 37
Private Power Generation Facility
Repair Service
Research and Development
Establishment
Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Design Business
Trade School
Tradesperson's Shop
Transport Terminal
Transportation Depot
Warehouse
9.1 1.2 PROHIBITED USES i) Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1. I,th e
following types of manufacturing uses
are prohibited, even as an accessory
use:
Beverage Distillation
Breweries
Explosives Manufacturing
Manufacturing of Asbestos,
Phosphate or Sulphur Products
Outdoor Storage
Primary Production of Chemicals,
Synthetic Rubber, Plastic, Asphalt
or Cement, not including mixing,
blending, treatment or similar
process
Processing or Refining of Petroleum
or Coal
Processing, Milling or Packaging of
Animal Feed
Pulp and Paper Mills
Salvage Yard
Slaughtering, Eviscerating, Rendering
or Cleaning of Meat, Poultry or Fish
or by-products thereof
Smelting of Ore or Metal
Tanning or Chemical Processing of
Pelts or Leather
Vulcanizing of Rubber or Rubber
Products
Waste Processing Facility
Waste Transfer Facility
ii) Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1. I,th e
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 32 of 37
following uses are prohibited, even as
accessory uses:
Day Nursery
Dwelling Unit
Elementary School
High School
Outdoor Storage
Place of Worship
Rock Crushing Plant
Waste Processing Facility
Waste Transfer Facility
iii) Notwithstanding 9.11.1, an
Agricultural Greenhouse shall only
be permitted as an accessory use to
another permitted use.
9.1 1.3 REGULATIONS
a) Minimum Lot Area 4000.0 square metres;
b) Minimum Lot Width 60.0 metres, where a lot has frontage on
Garner Road or Glancaster Road.
c) Yard Abutting a Street i) Minimum 6.0 metres;
ii) Maximum 25.0 metres.
d) Minimum Side Yard 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an lnstitutional Zone.
e) Minimum Rear Yard 6.0 metres from any portion of a property
lot line abutting a property lot line within a
Residential Zone or an lnstitutional Zone.
f) Maximum Building Height i) In accordance with the regulations of
Section 4.1 7 of this By-law.
ii) 15.0 metres, abutting a Residential
Zone or an lnstitutional Zone, or has
frontage on Garner Road or
Glancaster Road, or Twenty Road,
but shall not exceed the maximum
building height established by i)
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 33 of 37
above.
iii) In addition to ii) above, maximum
building height may be equivalently
increased as yard increases beyond
minimum yard requirement
established in 9.11.3 d) above, but
shall not exceed the maximum
building height established by i)
above.
g) Location Restriction of Any building or structure or part thereof,
Manufacturing Uses excluding accessory office space, used
for Manufacturing shall be setback a
minimum 20.0 metres from any portion of
a property lot line abutting a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone property lot
line.
h) Additional Regulations for Any outdoor training facilities shall be
Outdoor Training Facilities prohibited.
associated with a Trade
School
i) Maximum Gross Floor Area 3,000 square metres;
for Office Use within an
l ndividual Building
j) Additional Regulations for An Industrial Administrative Office or a
Industrial Administrative Surveying, Engineering, Planning or
Office or Surveying, Design Business shall be limited to a
Engineering, Planning or gross floor area of less than 10,000
Design Business square metres on a lot.
k) Minimum Landscaped Area i) 15% of total Lot Area;
ii) 6.0 metre wide Landscaped Area
shall be provided and maintained
abutting a street, except for points of
ingress and egress;
ii) Where a property lot line abuts a
property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, a
minimum 3.0 metre wide Planting
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 34 of 37
Strip shall be provided and
maintained.
I) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion of a
property lot line abutting a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone property
line, in accordance with Section 4.19 of
this By-law;
m) Location -and Size of Outdoor Display of goods, materials or
Outdoor Display equipment shall be permitted only as an
accessory use and the following
regulations shall apply:
i) Outdoor Display shall be permitted in
a yard abutting a street, but shall be
no closer than 3.0 metres to the lot
line;
ii) In addition to i) above, the area
devoted to Outdoor Display shall be
limited to a combined maximum of
25% of the Landscaped Area.
n) Maximum Gross FloorArea 25% of the gross floor area of the
for Accessory Retail and principal use or 500.0 square metres
Showroom Area gross floor area, whichever is the lesser.
o) Parking i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 5 of this By-law.
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, any parking
structure must be located in the rear
yard .
iii) Notwithstanding i) above, where a lot
has frontage on Garner Road or
Glancaster Road or Twenty Road,
no parking shall be permitted within
the front yard or side yard.
p) Accessory Buildings i) In accordance with the requirements
of Section 9.1 1.3 of this By-law.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 35 of 37
ii) Notwithstanding i) above, Section
9.1 1.3 c) ii) shall not apply.
6. That Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended as
follows:
a) by including the Industrial Zone boundaries, as shown on the Maps
numbered 1388-13 91, 1439-14 43, 1488-14 94, 1535-15 41, 1582-
1585, 1625-16 26, 1628-16 29, 1667-16 68, 1670-16 71, 1707-17 1 1,
1745-17 48, 1783-17 84, and 1818, attached in Schedule "1" of this
By-law;
b) by including the Open Space and Park Zone boundaries, as shown
on the Maps numbered 1338-1339, 1391, 1439, 1441-1442, 1488,
1490-14 94, 1537-15 41, 1585, 1625-16 26, 1629, 1668, 17 08, 1745-
1747, 1783-17 84, and 1818, attached in Schedule "1" of this By-
law;
7. That Schedule "C" - Special Exceptions of By-law 05-200 is hereby
amended by adding additional Special Exceptions as follows:
25. In addition to Section 9.1 1. I,on those lands zoned Airport Prestige
Business Park (M11) Zone, identified ,on Maps 1388 and 1389 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 618 Garner Road
East, a golf driving range and accessory uses and structures shall
also be permitted."
26. In addition to Section 9.11.1, on those lands zoned Airport Prestige
Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on Maps 1338 and 1390 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and described as 992 Garner Road
East, a landscape contractor's business, which may also include
facilities for plat propagation and the growing of plants and nursery
stock and an accessory snow removal business, shall also be
permitted.
27. In addition to Section 9.1 1.2 ii), on those lands zoned Airport Prestige
Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on Maps 1339 and 1391 of
Schedule "A - Zoning Maps and described as 116 Glancaster Road, a
high school shall also be permitted.
28. Notwithstanding Section 9.11.3 c) ii) and e), on those lands zoned
Airport Prestige Business Park (M11) Zone, identified on Maps1493
and 1494 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, any building or structure
used for Manufacturing shall be setback a minimum 20.0 metres from
Twenty Road West.
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 36 of 37
34. Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1. I, on those lands zoned Airport Prestige
Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on Map 1388 of Schedule "A" -
Zoning Maps and described as 534 Garner Road East, a restaurant
shall also be permitted.
35. Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1 .I and 9.1 1.2 i) and ii), on those lands
zoned Airport Prestige Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on Maps
1493, 1494, 1540, 1541 of Schedule " A - Zoning Maps a garden
centre, and outdoor display and outdoor storage shall also be
permitted.
36. Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1. I, on those lands zoned Airport Prestige
Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on Map 1338 of Schedule "A" -
Zoning Maps and described as 944-954 Garner Road East, a farmers
market shall also be permitted.
37. Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1.2 i) and ii), on those lands zoned Airport
Prestige Business Park (M11) Zone, identified on Map 1629 of
Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps, the following provisions shall apply:
a. Outdoor display and/or storage shall be permitted in accordance
with the following regulations:
i) Location of Outdoor Shall not be permitted in any front
Display and Outdoor yard or minimum side yard.
Storage
ii) Yard Abutting a Street 15 metres;
iii) Minimum Yard 15 metres;
Abutting a Residential
or an Institutional
Zone
iv) Visual Barrier Shall be provided along that portion
of a property lot line abutting a
property lot line within a Residential
Zone or an Institutional Zone, in
accordance with Section 4.19 of this
By-law.
39. Notwithstanding Section 9.1 1. I of this By-law, on those lands
zoned Airport Prestige Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on
Maps 1386, 1387, 1437, 1438 of Schedule "A" - Zoning Maps and
described as 4, 44, 70 Garner Road East and 587, 591 Fiddler's
Green Road, the following uses shall also be permitted:
To Amend By-law 05-200 to Create New Zones for the Airport Employment
Growth District for the City of Hamilton
Page 37 of 37
Place of Worship
Recreation"
8. That Schedule "Dl' - Holding Provisions of By-law 05-200 is hereby amended
by adding additional Holding Provisions as follows:
"37. Notwithstanding Section 9.7, 9.8, 9.9, 9.10, 9.1 1, 9.12 of this By-law,
on those lands zoned Airside Industrial (M7) Zone, Airport Related
Business (M8), Airport Light Industrial (M10) Zone, Airport Prestige
Business Park (MI 1) Zone, identified on 1337-13 39, 1389-13 91,
1439-14 43, 1488-14 92, 1535-15 39, 1581- 1 584, 1625-16 26, 1670-
1671, 1707-17 1 1, 1745-17 48, 1783-17 84, and 1818 of Schedule "A"
- Zoning Maps, site alteration shall be conditional upon the following:
a. that lands have access to servicing, the provision of
adequate municipal water, municipal wastewater, and
transportation infrastructure in accordance with the
respective master plans for the Airport Employment Growth
District to the Satisfaction of the Director of Development
Engineering;"
9. That the Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to proceed with the giving of
notice of passing of this By-law in accordance with the Planning Act.
D this 13'~da y of October, 2010.
74 73 67 72 66
448 444 376 380 383 48 443 77 499 75 474 39 46 0 40 04 403 40 4444 43 10 14 20 26 32 38 44 443 384 387 471 4477
439 467 462
459
423
419
455
451
744
444433 439
55
61
423 43
31
27
52
58
21 19 17
53
105 99 95 33 29 25 23 15 135 127 123 89 83 79 6633 61 5553 999 47 41 25 23 19 17 15 46 52 32 24 20 12 4 107 14 13 47 112222 87 118116 104 79100 7798 7390 71 84 80 6778 74 72 66 62 48 36 34 8 17 11 9 21 45 143 139 127 57
39 27 23 3
92 90 76 74 72 70 66 64 62 58 24 38 44445555 3 7 19 23 31 44 32 28 26 24 12 8 4
78
51 39 35 19 11 33 11 19 27 33
41
5
4
16 22
28 55
12 44 39 4444 32 M11
72 67
71
45
MAP 1334
9 5 1 45 46 5275 93
440
89 368 372 85 8 1
R C M A H G N IT T
O80 337755 3797669 7 42 9 46 55 9 41
87
61 R C
E G D
IRAA
B S T H
GMM 60
IN
KBBEE 49RR 44 9 4LL 0 8 46YY 856
42 7
8BB 47VV
40 6 6
352 7 36 8 30 8 34 8 38
92 408
36 37 7 31 7 35 7 39 8 33 8 37 9 31
9 35 99 40 447 1111
Y L R E B M A O T B W
3 0 4 P M A
R4 8 1122 16 2200 24 2 38 32
6
T C Y R U B S M O O L B77 1 11 15 29 223 77 3311 3 335
99
D R N E E R
G S 'R E L D D
IF371 E 3N15 9MO 11R 55E A 20V 19 26 25 32 29 38 35 44 41 HAT50 TO49 N D56 R
5 2
55 5861 79 78 HHII3399 GG66 84
HHWWAAYY
NN92
OO..
3 4491
0033
98 101 102 H
Map N R umef ber ee
rC nZ ci ot ey n io nf g NBH uyBa m-y Lm b- aLi ewl a rto wn
E BDff yae -tc Let a i ov wfe
431435 418
441144
410
C 391
395
463
435 431 427
415
79 85
9933
99
399 73
67
427 419 415 411 407 403 HIGHWAY NO. 403
RR AA MM PP FF TTII OODD DD 44LL 00EE 33 RR EESS BB
GGRREEEENN
29
37 49
MILLER DR 464
25 64
70
76
468
85 P13
MA
N L E L L IV R E M O35
S
K31 EN 30D BR R2827 I AC 135 I26 TK
H
13C 1 WT
A
1 I9 TE16 123
AV
11911 1157 833 111 12 19 13 37 119 44 155 14 159 51 3 125 121 117 120115113 83116111 106109 81 102F103 OX101 BOR 796 597 O L92 IU AG MH91 8 D8 D R86R87 6 9
851411 166
812 7 66 510 77 63 S 6U 8NT 6E 1R'S CT 6467 6065 DERBYSHIRE
1 ST5
79 5 57 447755 5053 4349 46 4 45 443 35403399 33 1837 FO33 XB31
O4 R2960
O 6127 U 0 19GH 15DR
11
15 71 91 7 5 D R N E E R G S 'R E L D D IF
21
19 7 R D R E L L IM 27 33 4400 39
GARDE5157
N AR 5588 VO
54
57S6633
ELA 64W 606N
369
AV 70
66669977
76 7275
474
7848 86 1492 8 7
1P 3M A
Legend
Zoning Boundary
96 88 8844 80 32 520 City Limits 150 50 11 15 27 35 68
39
66 84 40 36 34 18 511 12 18 49 55 63 69 526 # Special Exception
7 Holding Provision NAOMI CT 43 74 47 43 31 27 23
3 V A 10 47 70 4 CA Generic Regulation
E T IA
W H T IA R
B
68 64 6359
51 66
6622 58
48DERBYSH 40IRE
3
6ST
28 24 20 16 8
GARNER RD E 70
N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s e vin e rt yh e
bA
aL te
cr
g
he
e
sna
ed r im esa oy fn mot a a pp spear in each individual
4
76 80 79 75
MAP 1437
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1386 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1335
H A T DT RO N
128
134 140
108
116
122
HIGHWAY NO. 403
HHIIGGHHWWAAYY NNOO..
440033
RA
MP
403 EB TO
6 SB
RR AA
MM
PP 44 00 33 WW
BB TT
OO
66
SS
C Zi oty n io nf g H Ba ym -Lil ato wn
BB
157
137
141
145
149
153
Map Reference By-Law
Effective
86
P13 MA
4899
86
4 192
105 M 46I 1L 46L 7 4E
7109
3R
47 9
4
D
85
4R
911 101 43
1
9 7
1 417
6114 8
47 42
76
107121
G1114
A812
05
R465 DE115448833
N112299
1 26
A484
V14 18 97
1 33
130 448888491 123134 492495 127138 449966B4 U99 S 11 1H4 32
50 10
5 D03 R1 554 006
44
11 303
5507 550088115500
139
136511
512
16
4111
4104
6 18 7 12 7 16
18 98
2
416415 L L IE M
DR
R161
16 15
6 19 17 173 187 81 5
21
2
24
09
0
139
7 1
2211
26
3 30
4
T1
C
5
E N L
IM
19
23
27
34 13 3539 3 35 931
27
23
19 15
1RR 1DD EEMM LL PPDD
AA
MMEE RRRR
EE
VVLL
LL IISS
7AANN42
GGEE 34 30 26
322
18
14
VV
AA
TT NN UU OO MM DD
OO
OO
243
222666333
GARNER RD E
228811 301
RR AA MM PP 44 00 33 WW BB TT OO GG AA RR NN
EE RR
328
8
8
1P 3M A
Number Number BD ya -t Le a o wf
511 104 111100 114
118
4
T C L E B
A G
3
22
2
211
1
262
6
0
2 21 15 9 38 42 41
WW
282 298
306
223
7 Legend
224
R 99
8
12
11 224 225544 Zoning Boundary
D
025 N
O
GARNER RD E
City Limits
S
N
A
526
#
Special Exception
Holding Provision
39
CA Generic Regulation
Area
111444000
M11
114 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
a pp spear in each individual
70
MAP 1438
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1387 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1386
7
EE TT IIAA
WW
80 79 75 12 4
HH TT
IIAA RR BBVV AA
444888
D R
N E
444444
70 C Zi oty
n
io nf
g
H Ba ym -Lil ato wn
6688 56 E R G
S
'R
GGAARRNNEERR RRDD WW
106
999000 558 E L D
D IF
114
M11
Effective
5588 558877 Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
Date of
By-Law
591
588
3
9
598
4
6
3 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M 4
3
8
42
Legend
41
Zoning Boundary
658
City Limits
Special Exception
#
D
R
N Holding Provision
E
E
R
G
S CA Generic Regulation
'R
113322 E L D
D
Area
IF
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
702
MAP 1486
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1437 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1387
114
70
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
45
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
M11 3 9 Number Number Date of
By-Law
44
43
111444000
7
3 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M 4
3
9
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
777333111
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1487
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1438 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1489
BOOK RD E
1000
C Zi oty
n
io nf
g
H Ba ym -Lil ato wn
M11
558
H37 554488 566
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
1072
1071
604
D
R
H
By-Law
T
522 555999888 M11 IM S
447766 1084
430 D R
E T
O
1085
C
H
T
U
O
S
H37
5
3 M
5
1 A
P P
A 1
M 5
3
7
H
3
7
444444888
M7
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
1174
CA Generic Regulation
Area
1180
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1581
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1536 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1490
701
710
703 City of Hamilton
P5
Zoning By-Law
777700019995
723
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
727 Number Number
By-Law
735
737
M11
11007733
M11
TER
RD
9924 9914
9904
S
A
C
N
A
L
G
9923
DICKENSON
RD
W
7
3
H 1021
36
9907
M
5
1 A
P 11003311 P
A H37 1
M 5
3
H37 8
1043
9917 9893
9883
1059
M11
1185
1069 Legend
11008811 Zoning Boundary
City Limits
M7
D
R
H37 1091
#
Special Exception
H
T
IM
S Holding Provision
1107
CA Generic Regulation
888444444 Area
11111199
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
1127 map for every batch series of maps
7
3 M7
H 1135
MAP 1582
11
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1537 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1536
City of Hamilton
D
Zoning By-Law
R
E
T
O M7
C
H
T
U
O
S
Effective
111222222444 Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H37
0 John C. Munro
8 M
5 International Airport
1 A
P P
A 1
M 5
8
2
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1625
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1581 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1537
1141
11115511
City of Hamilton
1157
Zoning By-Law
1165
H37
M11
1173
D
R
H
T IM M7 1179
S
R
RD 1187 Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
E By-Law
T
AS 1193
M7 C
N
A
GL 11111222210000955559
1209
H37 1215
111222222333
1231
1239
M7
81 1247
M
5
1 A
P
A
1255 1P
M 5
8
1261 3
1269
H37 Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
John C. Munro
Special Exception
International Airport #
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1626
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1582 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1628
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
John C. Munro
International Airport
9
6 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
7
1
9300
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1710
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1670 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1629
2644
2656
City of Hamilton
M7
222666666666 Zoning By-Law
2674
John C. Munro
International Airport
22663333
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
222666888888 Number Number Date of
By-Law
M7
2696
T
S
S
E
M
A
R
J
E
P
P
U
2712
2718 22771155
M7 Refer to By-law
No. 464
2721
2222222777777722222224444444
0
7 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 2740 6
7
2
282 18
22 08 600
2741 8528
8518
8512
8504
8494
8488
M9
284422881166
8475
EN847 G4
LISH
C88446666
HURCH88445588
RD
E8452
8444
8436
8428
8422
8412
8404
8398
8388
Legend
Z Co itn yi n Lg
im
B io tsundary
Special Exception
#
MES
ST 888444444555
8429
8374
Holding Provision
22882266
UPPER
JA 8419
8409
8401
8395
88338855
C ArA
e
aGeneric Regulation
2862
8377
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
2876
2869
MAP 1711
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1671 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1670
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
9272
John C. Munro
International Airport
9270
9268
9
0 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
1
1
Legend
Zoning Boundary
M9
City Limits
Special Exception
#
999222666666 333000555444
Holding Provision
Area
333000333444 CA Generic Regulation
Refer to
By-law
No.
4643044
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1748
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1710 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
MAP 1671
2876 M9 2869
2888
City of Hamilton
M9
Zoning By-Law
222888999444
2900
T
S
2906 ES
M
A
222999111000 UPPER
J
R Ne of .e 4r
6
t 4o By-law
Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
By-Law
2918 DR
D
A
E
T
S
E
M
O
H
2942
2950
2958
2907
10 Refer to
M
17 2966By-law A
P P
A No. 464 1
M 7
1
2976 2965 2
2982
33005544
22999900
R
D
D
A
3000 STE
ME Legend
33000022 HO
Zoning Boundary
3012
City Limits
3020
3023 603 20 422 33 11 43 23 902 70 69 1 38 7 33 13 513 1203 972 0 9299 7 335 11 53 4 53 03 10 90 4 10 13 33 13 1 43 0 1 50 5 71 11 T S S E M
A
# HSp oe ldc inia gl E Px roc ve ip st ii oo nn
J
R
333000333444 E P P CA Generic Regulation
U Area
33 054044 33 13 1 53 1 43 10 1 13 0 6 72 0 2 39 0 7 38 3 3 13 3 1 53 1 43 50 2 53 0 7 72 0 4 99 1 19 15 33 13 13 40 23 0 99 90 5 11 17 888333555000 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s e vin e rt yh e b aL te cg he sn ed r im esa oy fn mot a a pp spear in each individual
MAP 1749
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1711 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date10/7/2010
H#
MAP 1284
48 60 61 16 12 8 333888888
395
54 7350 5146 4742 4238
39
35 31 27 23 19 15 11 7 354 390 444000777 252 C Zi oty n io nf g H Ba ym -Lil ato wn
79
83
87 410
91 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
95 Date of
Number Number
99 By-Law
116
10 13
10 17
11
1 415
47
51 55
59
65
69
73
77 7581
79400
410
446
449
25
34
38
42
46 50
54
265
26 26
26 50
6
41 46
41 28
0
411
6
24 30
1 19 95
9199
203
207 206211 215 212219 2162 22 23 0224227 228253
232 236
2402 25 422
448
42 42
2 44 2 46
28
421
42 47
31
445522
444466660000
3 P13 116 18 17
83
1 18 86
2
441 PM A
A 178 1
M 179 174 480 33
173 170 8
11 00 48 16 19
65
1 16 66
2
451 490
100 161 158
96 157 154 496
92 153 150 461
88 148 500
142
138 470 467
508
135
132
128 475 Legend
1 12 24 0 880077 516
119 116 Zoning Boundary
60 115 112 480
5 56 2 11 11 07 1 10 08 4 484 City Limits
51
39
3 35
1
4 48 44 0
3 126
10 93 99 65
5
10 660 64 6562 6360 6158 5956 5754 5350 5148 4946 4744 4542 4340 43 18 33 96 32 28 2 24
10 6
12
8
48 4 648 9 9 42 6
7 50
04
819 # CHSp Aoe
l d
Gc ini ea
g
nl eE
P
rx
r io
cc ve Rip
s
et ii
o
go
n
un
lation
27
23
19 15 11 79
7 75
61
7 63
56545250484442 4403836
3
5343230 292725232112
191513119753
668833
723 725
777
785
789 793
M11
H37
N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s e vin e rt yh e
bA
aL te
cr
g
he
e sn ed r im esa oy fn mot a a pp spear in each individual
509 8 83 1 8 70 8 6 8 7 9 713
7 79 5 7 76 2 1 16 8 1 15 17 9 6 701 792
MAP 1389
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1337 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1285
55
154
158
415 162
City of Hamilton
166
Zoning By-Law
111000666111
425
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
455
446655
11003355
999222777
7
479 989
1001
1009
3 13 485 999666111 999777555 M A
P P
A 1
M 875 1021 3 93
969
H37
449911 851 889911
899
H37 26
998
1006
1010
M11
1024
1038
1048
H37
992
Legend
964
36 Zoning Boundary
M11 P5 City Limits
M11
910 M11
Special Exception
#
876
880
880
Holding Provision
886688
836
846
850
858
P5
C ArA
e
aGeneric Regulation
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
M11 map for every batch series of maps
H
828 3 7
M10
H37
MAP 1390
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1338 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1286
44
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
64
68
72
111000666111 80 76 Map Reference By-Law E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
84 Number Number
By-Law
88 4
92
11115577 111111666999 1175
1211
750
740
720 124124
56
120116112108104100 19 16
1107
51 47
43 39
3550
44
38
328
1117
1123
132
131121 517
1814
10 1173
22 15
27
H37
21
8 772233
3 M
3
1 A
P
A
707 1P
M
M11
699
691 4
03
H37 777777777777777777775555555555555555555511111111111111111111 687
677 667
659
1058
1064
1072
1086
1100
85
7178
7574
68
64 58
5544
48 44
38
34
28
22
11 84
10 6
M11 1814 59 55 51 47
43
6 Legend
P5
111166
77
302622 2311991511 1410
2
31
6
27 23 19
15 11
7
Z Co itn yi n Lg
im
B io tsundary
H37 3834 27 18 10 14 1238 # Special Exception
42
35 58 54 5500
26
1242 Holding Provision
M11
H 3 7
M11
979185
8381
5
6
6
78
2
6
0
545046
66
75
175 73 361 22255
218
51
221144
2147
0
20643 20239
193 85 1947
22
1901111
186
1 11885
22 17 18
851188
174
181
17 10
77
11 76 36
121 616 62
9
2
N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
bC
A
aL te
crA
g
he
e
s
na
eG
d
r
im
ee
sa
oyn
fn
e
mot
ar
a
pi
p
sc
p
eR
ar
e
in
g eau chl a indt ii vo idn
ual
MAP 1391
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1339 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1336
110
112 492
448866
509
504
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
520 559
581587
552233
527535
Map Reference By-Law
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
515 Number Number
By-Law
448899
550011
507
34
618
389
443
453
445599
469
448811
595
534
Refer to
M11
By-law 87-57
447788
447744
436
7
8 M
3
1 A
P
A
557722 1P
M 3
8
9
370 25
M11
378
M11
346
328
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
Refer to
CA Generic Regulation
By-law 87-57
Area
111444000
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1439
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1388 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1337
509
7 75
73
1
7 72
60
8
1 28
20
2
1
2
29
1
3
661
69 66 26 27
6 67 5 6 62 0 2 38 0 2 39 1 H37
605 6 51 5 59 7 5 5 58 6 32 3 3 33 5 7 C Zi oty n io nf g H Ba ym -Lil ato wn
555999111 5 53
1
587
581 25
746 M11
734 826
716
726
Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
By-Law
H37
8
8 M
3
1 A
P P
A 1
M 618 595 9 03
M11
M10
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
M11 Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1440
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1389 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1338
830
P5
City of Hamilton
M11
1006
Zoning By-Law
M11
H37
H37
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
999945444444 By-Law
H
3
7
888833332222
9
8 M
13 M10 A
P P
A 1
M 3
9
1
Legend
222200004444
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
H37
Special Exception
#
M11 Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
222555444
MAP 1441
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1390 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1339
11005588
M11 1072
M
111166
21 71
H37
171159137
135112255111 913 97 7 74 8 82
86
90
94
98
1027 13
06
110
18 141
87
119 83
129 49
1312 02 05
5
134
1322 81
6622
11521 157
8
21
1122552 513
4
13163
13520 509
1459
1
1442 46605
555
562 42
5 51
266
47
41 80 14 11 443388
4444
53 59
40
44991 3585
36
433
31 211 15 371 29
82 223
77
33
251
2 24
12
29
46
2
506
Map
N
R umef ber ee
rC
nZ
ci ot ey
n
io nf
g
NBH uyBa
m-y
Lm
b-
aLi ewl
a
rto wn
E BDff yae -tc Let
a
i ov wfe
142 161 239
183
146
115500
116699
175 179
183
187 191
154
158
116622
166
170
174
178
182
186
190
194
198
0 M
9
1 7 A
P
A
H3 1P
M 3
9
2
227
8
M11
222200004444
269225533245
10
12
14
16
1918
221120
2322
24
26
29
28
31
3333 3330
3
8532
373344
393366
4138
4340
4542
44 46
48
4350
52 554
9
56 58 60 62 64 66 68 70 7722 74
7 76
8
Legend
Z Co itn yi n Lg
im
B io tsundary
295 51 10 6 4 41 57 50 2 80 # Special Exception
222555444
305301
43454749 42444648
1113115517 141618 1 91
7 5 3
2 3133353739 474951553355 4042444648
11
81
641210864
11
319753182
6364
C
AH rAo el d aGin eg
n
eP rr io
c
v Ris eio gn
ulation
40 1122 29 20 15
P5
315 3941 38 79 10 20 27 45 1 11797 58 59 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s e vin e rt yh e b aL te cg he sn ed r im esa oy fn mot a a pp spear in each individual
345 3537 22 36 20 18 5 3 68 20 21 22 35 59 5743 55 41 53 39 37 35 33 31 29 27 25 2321 5257 5356
MAP 1442
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1391 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1388
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
M11
8
3 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M 4
4
0
777555666
Legend
P5
Refer to
Zoning Boundary
By-law 87-57
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
M11
H37 Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1488
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1439 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1389
City of Hamilton
M10
Zoning By-Law
777333555
M11 Map Reference By-Law Effective
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H
3
7
9
3 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M 4
4
1
H
3
7
M10 777999999
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
M11
H37 888000999
#
Special Exception
881111
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
M11
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
888333777
MAP 1489
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1440 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1390
222555444
H
3
7
M11
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
H
3
7
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
883322
P5
444111444
H37
M11
0
4 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M 4
4
2
M10
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
447788
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
P5
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
444999888
MAP 1490
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1441 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1391
254 P5 33 22 20 18 3 24 20 19 21 61 59 57 55 53 51 49 47 45 43 41 29 39 27 5 25 51 5053
345 31 17 63 3377
P5 336655 35
11741
53
16
59
18 6529 7120 27 7722 25 7924 8123 26 8321 28 19 30 17 8932 9115 34 13 36 11 40 9 42 7 44 5
46
3 3579111315 81797775773371696765 7876747270686664 1214161822 02 24262830 151719212325272931 33 3335 343940 34 55 34 86 41 36444 37 742 4348
Map
N
R umef ber ee
rC nZ ci ot ey n io nf g NBH uyBa m-y Lm b- aLi ewl a rto wn
E BDff yae -tc Let
a
i ov wfe
M11
15
19
28 32 36
40
80 810 9111113
28
2932
31 24
23 27
9874
99886622
9854
99884444
357
27
26
2530 2223
21
9906
9890
999888333222
9814
9800 9796
414
9788
9778
P4 9772
9754
41
P14
A
H37 423
9738
99772244
1PM
A
M 4
429 4 3
435
M11 H37
441
444499
9714
9704
453
Legend
459
99774499
Zoning Boundary
467
478
P5
471
9751
City Limits
M11
477 # Special Exception
485 Holding Provision
H37
489
CA Generic Regulation
Area
495
M10
498
501
555
N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
pa sppear in each individual
507
515
MAP 1491
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1442 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1392
42 P14
MA4 3179 2054 3 11 98 9714319 13 61 3246 13 7233 91 701 43 8223 11 3210 3 123 0 965 91 4353 2 11 5 433 2 20 169 332 173 03 21 84 113 31 133 3 23 20 383 13 90 963 87 43 02 83 9333 73433 37 435 37 543 6373 583 373 6733 337 92 66 62 239 233 75 1 293 14 3700 36934 4412 19 30 4 643 24 23
2
33 994 662 44882 2 81 30 22 0 28 0 4 59 1023 24 15 23 24 12706 22 138 944 7
2
12 418 93
9
665 325 20 173 16242 9 138 8 1143 8 123 82 158 512 3 25
1
132
4
2022 3 17 5 38 3 22
9621
27 02153 09 25 16 13 2 25 412 5 2 137 757 24 3 02 5
29
627 76 032
8
157 9285
0
22 83 727 5 96022 9 4252 2 07 2123 43
2
32 6 06 027 2 524 3 276 021 632 2 2367 8 33322201 2 22 3 037 2 36 20 233 32
0
326 1 456 2249 32 3 2026 6 0226 5 132 19 356 62293 777 2 8162 3 986 8 938 32 26 841 07 2902 3 246 6 2 125 6 93 442 00746 22 1474 32 976
36
113 2 24 48 40
9
252 25 23 43 33 12 35
3
424 44 926 332 65 29 49 2 139
48
632 56 7120 825
6
142 4 922 2 15 4
7
45 5
9
812 385 758 2 1 15 70 8
1 98
12 826 51 1 181 07 531
1
2981 43 7 162 0 105 76 7 902 15 47 12 1811 8721 942 416 532 41 116 879 36140 171 1 3 13 4 89 3
52
61441 13 448 75 11 768 5146 11 13 54 27 87 914 318 741 54 19 11 6 25 70
67
013 1 1 36 5 66 2 60 1 10 61 5 55
33
53 161 645
77
44 1 16 43 516 12 4161 1 53 55 916 40 9159 5 11 3 158 666 31 115713 614 56 515 65 79715 3 60 3 5 70 79838 327 89 319 2359 6491 00 41 3 40 41 7 81 51 11 211 559 61 623 06468771 222 77 68084 438892 419 113 611 401 30
1
90
1
21 84 00 61 48 3711 13 25 1 446 3341 239
4
34 10
326
231 9843 34
038
36 2781
21 80
30 11 31 2
4
24 52612 22 980
1
342 22 24 42 272 6
116
23
18
0
93 2623
2
23 57463
5
18
2 18
94 8 70 294 312
12 70
121 1 864 14 365 58 15 520 25 2 114 65 936
2223
24
15
4
115 13
2
70258 287
121
95187 325 07104 14 39 3
1
71
065 94 3224 7 97 12951 551 1 113
3
31
1
419 14 123315 1 31 6 68 1 53 61
1 910
61
3
357 6611 88 40 501 7322 619 21 0 42 2 224 729321 441 13 442 36 353 32 47 63 128 6 5412 8307 72 69 32
97
831 273
7
42 13
7
1683 4
8
103 0633 84 12 244 4 1514 6 1850 15
71 13
6645 665 18 16 981560 866 2 24
12070
17
2272
21
427 36
9557 53
15
3727
5
581 751
28
70771 1 17 5 3
82
29722 913
4 4
1P
4M A
M Leap gN R u eme nf be dr ee rC nZ ci Zot ey on nio n inf g NB gH uyB a Bm-y Lm ob- aL ui ewl a nrto w dn aryE BDff yae -tc Let a i ov wfe
99666677
M11
H37
P4
9586
2000
68 3
3
54
74 64 464
95
8
8052
1110
139 1211
151410
13
1612 1514 1716 1918
2420
23 2625
2824
27
3026
29
3228 30
3 33
6
35
33 84
37
4036 3 48
3 29
#
C
C
AHS
ri
p
Aot ey
e
l d
aG
cL
ini
ei am
g
nl
ei
E
Pts
rx
r io
cc ve Rip
s
et ii
o
go
n
un
lation
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
4
99 55 87 55
6 8 10
14 16 18 20 9420 9410
9396
MAP 1492
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1443 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1439
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
P5
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
7
3
H
M11
7
8 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M 4
8
9
444445555511111
M11
444412221777
222200009999
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
Refer to By-law 87-57 Refer to
By-law 87-57
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1535
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1488 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1440
888555555 City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
888777999
M10 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H
3 7 999111111
999333111
H
3
7
999222444
932
88 999999222
M
14 936 999666111 A
P P
A 1
M 4
9
940 0
M11
M11
944
967
981
999555777
Legend
M11
999955
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
1001
Holding Provision
1009
CA Generic Regulation
Area
601
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1536
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1489 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1441
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
888666111 P5
888333111
881177 550
Effective
M10 Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H37
888000111
P5 57
558833
589
9
8 M
4
1 627 A
P P
A 1
M 4
9
1
631
777444555 635
639
H37 643
Legend
647
Zoning Boundary
M11
M11
City Limits
P5
H37
669 Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
673
P5
M11
CA Generic Regulation
677 Area
681 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
a pp spear in each individual
777666666
689
MAP 1537
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1490 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1442
515
P5
521
City of Hamilton
527
Zoning By-Law
M11
533 M11
H37
539
7
3
H
545
Effective
549
99775511 Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
Date of
By-Law
7
559 H3
561
565
571
77
555555555
0
9 M
4
1 A
P P
A 1
M P5 94
2
M10
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
P5
MAP 1538
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1491 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1443
9410
9396
M11 P4
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
M11
M10
7
3
H
1
9 M
4
1 M11 A
P P
A 1
M 4
9
3
7
3
H
Legend
Zoning Boundary
M10 City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
P5 CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
999555111111 map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1539
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1492 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1444
9396 111 211 001 806 9799 53918987 1009897 99 65 99 43 99 21 98 09 87 8888 65 88 438 8 86 1 288 074 9 78778 76 584
109
089699 49 20
99
9799
539188 978558 56 5354 515 42 950 474 48 5 43
373533
7 39 1777577 31 83 92 8730 22 78 2526 2324 2122
16
17 47 57 36 19 1215 1013 811 6779 42706875 C Zi oty n io nf g H Ba ym -Lil ato wn
9274
9266
959391 929088 1 85
9
13 11 9 7
5 Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
97 9694 9391 98 08 By-Law
98 9795 92 1902
99 94
96
98
99999222228888855555
P4
M11
9181
9171
92
P14
MA
9163
9153
9143
9135
999111222777
28
9
1P
4M
A
M9113
11
9105
9097
9087
4
M11 Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
M10 #
P5
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
P5
M11 Area
M11 Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
35
MAP 1540
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1493 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1445
182 175 9922
181 58 361 188
185179
178172
171
100
108
City of Hamilton
194 Zoning By-Law
191 182 177 174
198
195 186 181
182
204
11887799 199 192 118877
1902 221100 205 119988 191 188
185
Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
214
220099 202 197 196
By-Law
193
220 215 208 201
220022
1885 226 221 212 207
201
208
223300 225 218 211
1899 232 222299 222 221177 216 211
1915 236 228 221 222
219 194
242
91
1927 60 66 228 196
93
P14 248
70
76
82
227 198 PM
A
MA 1980 1941 7937 260254 251247
244
231
98
102
108
235
202 400
9 5
1 4
9079 9071
9063
9049
9041
28
1977
1955
8518 8506
226644
268
267261257 258254248 249243
248
251239
8500 8494 264
256
Legend
M201121
8480
8472
8464
8456
8448
8434
272266
257 Zoning Boundary
City Limits
P5
2028 88442244
8418 282
226633
Special Exception
#
269
8410
Holding Provision
M11
277 8374
35
8366
8356
8348
244
C ArA
e
aGeneric Regulation
246
M11
2081
88552255 8397
8389
8381
8373
8365
8357
8349
8341
N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
a pp spear in each individual
MAP 1541
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1494 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1488
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
H37
M11
M11
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H37
Refer to
343
By-law 87-57
418
428
430
281
4
3 M
5
1 A
P P
A 282 1
M 5
3
6
333300
282
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1580
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1535 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1489
City of Hamilton
1000
Zoning By-Law
M11
558
H37 554488 566
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
1072
1071
604 By-Law
522 555999888 M11
447766 1084
430
1085
H37
5
3 M
5
1 A
P P
A 1
M 5
3
7
444444888
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
1174
CA Generic Regulation
Area
1180
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1581
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1536 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1490
701
710
703 City of Hamilton
P5
Zoning By-Law
777700019995
723
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
727 Number Number
By-Law
735
737
M11
11007733
M11
9924 9914
9904
9923
7
3
H 1021
36
9907
M
5
1 A
P 11003311 P
A H37 1
M 5
3
8
1043
9917 9893
9883
1059
M11
1185
1069 Legend
11008811 Zoning Boundary
City Limits
M7
7 1091
H3
#
Special Exception
H
3
7 Holding Provision
Refer to By-law 87-57
1107
CA Generic Regulation
888444444 Area
11111199
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
1127 map for every batch series of maps
7
3 M7
H 1135
MAP 1582
11
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1537 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1491
P5
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
M10
P5
999666888000
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H37 37
H
H37
M10
9872
9864
9856
9848
9840
9834
9826 9810
9756
37
5
9798
9778 M
1 A
P
MA
9788 1P
5
9768 3 9
9831 9803
9823
M11
9793
9620
P5
99881133 9807
9803
Legend
9781
9761
Zoning Boundary
9757
9747 City Limits
99773311
M11
9717
9707
99669977
9675
9671
9655
#
HSp oe ldc inia gl E Px roc ve ip st ii oo nn
9631 CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
9579
9569
MAP 1583
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1538 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1492
H
3
7
City of Hamilton
9999444444445555 Zoning By-Law
P5
M11 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H37
M10
M10
8
3 M
5
1 A
P P
A 1
M 5
4
0
999333222222
Legend
P5 Zoning Boundary
M11
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
9520 Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
M11 M11
H37
9236
9517
MAP 1584
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1539 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1493
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
5
3
M11
M11 Map Reference By-Law Effective
P5 Date of
Number Number
By-Law
222111333060
P5
M10
9
3 M
5
1 A
P P
A 1
M 5
4
1
P5
2200
Legend
Zoning Boundary
999222333666
City Limits
Special Exception
#
M11
M10 Holding Provision
P5
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Refer to By-law No. 464
2240 Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
M11 9084 map for every batch series of maps
9196
MAP 1585
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1540 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1494
5
8349
8341
3
2080 129
City of Hamilton
M11
139
20 Zoning By-Law
2088
111333666
2098
22110044
222000888111 36 25 156 Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r
E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
By-Law
42 39
2112
149
P5
2118
115577
2124
Refer to By-law No. 464
2136
2129
2144
0 22115500
4 M
5
1 A
P
A
2156 1P
M 2149 5
4
2
2173
Legend
2179 Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
2219
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1586
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1541 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1537
1141
11115511
City of Hamilton
1157
Zoning By-Law
1165
H37
H
3 7 1173 M11
M7 1179
Effective
1187 Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
1193
11111222210000955559
1209
1215
111222222333
1231
1239
M7
81 1247
M
5
1 A
P
A
1255 1P
M 5
8
1261 3
1269
H37 Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
John C. Munro
Special Exception
International Airport #
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1626
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1582 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1538
9867 City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
M11
H37
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
9593
2
9541
8 M
5
1 A
P
A
M7 1P
M 5
8
4
1205
1199
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
H37 CA Generic Regulation
Area
John C. Munro Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
International Airport
MAP 1627
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1583 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1539
H37 M11
City of Hamilton
P5 9360
M11
Zoning By-Law
9423 9346
999333999999
9236
M11 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
9359
M7
H37
999444555111
3
8 M
5
1 A
P P
A 1
M 5
8
5
H37
John C. Munro
International Airport
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1628
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1584 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1540
M10
P5
2235
222222555444
City of Hamilton
2240
38 2264 Zoning By-Law
9084 24 2270
9236 14
2272
2219
M10 2274
M11
2273 Effective
M11
25 19 2282 8284
2280
2277
Map
N
R umef ber ee rnce NB uy m-L ba ew
r BD ya -t Le
a
o wf
2292
2285
2294
99220066
9196
9188
9180
22330000
22331100
Refer to By-law No. 05-200
2328
84 2219
M
15 2332
A
P
MA
9070
2340
1P
5
8
John C. Munro 6
Refer to By-law No. 464
International Airport 9036
2350
M11
8512
Legend
Zoning Boundary
2470
P5
8531
8523
8515
8505
C Si pty
e
cL ii am
l
i Ets
xception
2460 #
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
M11
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1629
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1585 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1581
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
1430
111444666000
4
2 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
2
6
333666333
111444777222
Refer to By-law No. 87-57
M9 Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
1534 Area
P5
493 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
a pp spear in each individual
459
451
444111999 433
MAP 1667
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1625 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1582
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
John C. Munro
International Airport
5
2 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
2
7
111222000888
M9
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
M9
CA Generic Regulation
P5
Area
111222999222
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1668
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1626 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1583
City of Hamilton
M7 Zoning By-Law
H37
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
6
2 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
2
8
Legend
John C. Munro
Zoning Boundary
International Airport
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
9300
9300
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1669
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1627 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1584
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
7
2 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
2
9
M11
Legend
Zoning Boundary
John C. Munro City Limits
International Airport
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1670
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1628 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1585
2470
2460 City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
John C. Munro
International Airport 2492
2481
Effective
2502 Map Reference By-Law Date of
Number Number
By-Law
2520
M11
28 2543 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
3
0
2559 Refer to By-law No. 464
22557755
M11 Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
37
2633
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
M7
John C. Munro 22662244
2633 CA Generic Regulation
Area
International Airport
22662233
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
M7
2656
2644
MAP 1671
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1629 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1625
999
M9
P5 City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
405
1380
446
6
6 M
6
1 A
P P
MA 408 1
6
6
396 8
Refer to By-law
No. 87-57
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
227788
1111444483886666
Area
M9
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1707
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1667 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1626
111666000333
M9
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
P5
Refer to
By-law 87-57 1629 Map Reference By-Law Effective
Date of
Number Number
1370
1635
By-Law
1645
1651
1659
1665
1691 John C. Munro
7 International Airport
6 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
6
9
M9
1731
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1708
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1668 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1628
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
John C. Munro
International Airport
9
6 M
6
1 A
P P
A 1
M 6
7
1
9300
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
M9
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1710
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1670 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1667
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
M9
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Refer to By-law 1867
No. 87-57
1602
99889900
6
0 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
0
8
1640
M9 Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
2115 CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1745
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1707 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1668
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
M9 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
John C. Munro
International Airport
7
0 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
0
9
9660
Legend
Zoning Boundary
999888777999
City Limits
Special Exception
#
M9
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
P5
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1746
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1708 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1669
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
John C. Munro
International Airport
9300
8
0 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
1
0
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
M9 9555 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
a pp spear in each individual
MAP 1747
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1709 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1670
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
9272
John C. Munro
International Airport
9270
9268
9
0 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
1
1
Legend
Zoning Boundary
M9
City Limits
Special Exception
#
999222666666 333000555444
Holding Provision
333000333444 CA Generic Regulation
Refer to Area
By-law
No.
4643044
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1748
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1710 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1707
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
M9
P5 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
Refer to By-law M9
No. 87-57
4
4 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
4
6
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Refer to By-law
Special Exception
No. 464 #
11888800 Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
9760 9910
MAP 1782
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1745 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1708
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
M9 P5
999777000555
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
M9
P5
5
4 M
7
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
4
7
Legend
Refer to By-law Zoning Boundary
No. 464
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
M8
Area
H37 N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
b
aL te cg he sn ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
pa sppear in each individual
MAP 1783
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1746 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1709
9555
City of Hamilton
John C. Munro
Zoning By-Law
International Airport
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
M9
9255
9433
M8
6
4 M
7
1 A
P
A
P5 1P
M 7
4
8
P5
M9
99555555
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Refer to By-law
No. 464
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Re99f55e 5555r to By-law Area
No. 464
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1784
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1747 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1710
9300
John C. Munro 3076 City of Hamilton
International Airport Zoning By-Law
9999222266666666
333000555444
M9
Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
9220
9210
9202
9192
9184
9178
3102
Number Number
By-Law
47
P17
A
9255
9221
9213
9205
9197 9191 9189
9181
91699174
9166
91 95 18
49
9152
9142
9135
9132 91259120
9115
9105
9110
9100
99009922
9086 9078
9074
9066
999000555666
9046
9038 9026 9032
33311144444431 33 16
53
0133
0124313 11 416
1PM A
M 3154 47
33115566 9
42
40
55
35 86
53
54
36
51
3452
49
3250
47
3048
45
2228884466
4433
226644
41 2440
42
44
4466 48
5500
555222
4908 19 439075
4455
47
49
51
53
55
57
59
61
63
9061
9045
9037
9031
3322110099002277 9023 9013
R Ne of .e
4r32
6
0 t0
4o By-la 3w
219
333222000111
88555555
88555588
88555522
88554411
Legend
Zoning Boundary
41
22
54 65 3234 3223
City Limits
5939 555637
5152
35
4748
3333
4344
3 31
940
3529
36
312277
32
2725
28
2323
24
1921
20
11155519
16
1117
1256
78
6
6 6
60
2 4
6
4
83
8381811
179797777
79
7 53
7 5 3
33 2723 234
2663260
3250
3269
3249
33 22 65
33333222333999323 32 129
3311
8533
N o t e :
mFe#
aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
bC
AHS
aL te
crp
Ao
g
he
e
e
l
s
nd
a
eG
dc
r
i
im
eni
e
sa
a
g
oynl
f
n
e
mE
P
ot
ar
x
par
i
spo
cc
p
ve
eR
aip
rs
e
int ii
o
g
eo
an
u
cn
hl a indt ii vo idn
ual
MAP 1785
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1748 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1746
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
7
3
H
999666333000
Effective
Refer to By-law Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
No. 464 By-Law
999444999000
2
3 7 M8 H37 M
1 A
P P
A 1
M 7
8
4
Legend
Refer to By-law
P5 Zoning Boundary
No. 464
9645
9627 City Limits
Special Exception
#
9370
Holding Provision
9575
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1817
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1783 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1747
999222555555
City of Hamilton
Zoning By-Law
Refer to By-law M8
No. 464
Refer to By-law
No. 464 Effective
Map Reference By-Law
Date of
Number Number
By-Law
H37
H
37
3
8 M
7
1 A
P A 184 1P
M 7
8
5
183
179
8
12
16
Legend
20
M8 24 Zoning Boundary
28
City Limits
32
36
162
158
154
115500
146
14240
#
HSp oe ldc inia gl E Px roc ve ip st ii oo nn
Refer to By-law 113388
No. 464 159 CA Generic Regulation
9370
P5
230 226
21
2255
151
147
143
139
135 131
N o t e : mFe aa pt u for re s
e
vin
e
rt yh e
bA
aL te
cr
g
he
e
sna
ed
r
im esa oy fn mot
a
pa sppear in each individual
P5 221188
214
210 206 202
MAP 1818
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1784 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#
MAP 1784
206
202
198
9370
H37 M8 P5
City of Hamilton
9425
185 Zoning By-Law
H37
99221100
99334499 Map Reference By-Law E Dff ae tc et i ov fe
Number Number
By-Law
Refer to By-law
No. 464
999333444999
9157
9147
9141
9133
7
1 M
8
1 A
P P
A 1
M 8
1
9
Legend
Zoning Boundary
City Limits
Special Exception
#
Holding Provision
CA Generic Regulation
Area
Note: Features in the Legend may not appear in each individual
map for every batch series of maps
MAP 1849
SCALE 1 : 3,000
MAP 1818 of Schedule 'A'
© Teranet Land Information Services Inc. and its licensors. [2010] May Not be Reproduced without Permission. THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY Plot Date8/31/2010
H#



Content from 10315 to amend bylaw no 10142 a bylaw to regulate fencespdf:
Item 30, Planning Committee
Authority:
Report; 10-001 (PED1 0084(b))
CM: December 15, 2010
Bil No. 315
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-315
To Amend By-law No. 10-142, a By-law to Regulate Fences
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to regulate fences being City of Hamilton By-law No.
10-142;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for an amendment to City of Hamilton By-law NO.1 0-
142;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 3(4) of By-law No. 10-142 is amended by adding following new paragraph
after paragraph (c):
(d) in Ward 12, an extension to prevent deer from jumping over the fence may exceed
such a limit by a maximum of OAm, provided that:
the extension, not including support structure, is constructed of not more than
(i)
lines of fencing wire or similar wire-like material; and
4 horizontal
each line of fencing wire or similar wire-like material is a maximum of 1 cm in
(ii)
diameter.
2. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 15th day of December 2010.
Q L3c tf~
i
R. Bratina
Mayor



Content from 10316 to amend bylaw no 10197 a bylaw respecting signs within the city of hamiltonpdf:
Item 20, Planning Committee
Authority:
Report; 10-001 (PED 05172(j)
CM: December 15, 2010
Bil No. 316
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 10-316
To Amend By-law No. 10-197, a By-law Respecting Signs within the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law respecting signs being City of Hamilton By-law NO.1 0-
197;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for technical and housekeeping amendments to City of
Hamilton By-law NO.1 0-197;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Paragraphs 3.2.4 and 3.2.5 of By-law NO.1 0-197 are deleted and replaced with the
following new paragraph:
3.2.4 No person shall alter a sign for which a sign permit has been obtained without the
prior written permission of the Director and, where a building permit also has been
obtained, the prior written permission of the Chief Building OfficiaL. Such
permission may be conditional on a new sign permit or building permit or both being
applied for and obtained.
2. Subparagraph 5.1.1 (f) of By-law NO.1 0-197 is amended by adding the words "that is
visible from the travelled portion of the right of way" after "the Red Hill Valley Parkway".
3. Subparagraph 5.2.2(1) of By-law NO.1 0-97 is deleted and replace with following new
subparagraph:
(I) notwithstanding (k):
(i) 1 Construction Information Ground Sign;
(ii) 1 Ground Sign which provides courtesy or directional information only, such as a
menu board or clearance sign;
(iii) or both,
are permitted;
By-law to amend the Sign By-law NO.1 0-197
Page 2 of 2
4. Subparagraph 5.2.2(m) of By-law NO.1 0-97 is deleted and the following subparagraphs
relettered accordingly.
5. This By-law is deemed to have come into force on August 12, 2010.
PASSED this 15th day of December, 2010
fl ßßQ, L-
R. Bratina
Mayor



Content from 11036 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-001 (FCS11009/ PW11004)
CM: January 26, 2011
Bil No. 036
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-036
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law No. R84-026, being a .
by-law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system
of The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of
water rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilon Act, 1999, S.D. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilon stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.D. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.D. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 26th day of January, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-001 and
did authorize the 2011 water and wastewater fees and charges, including but not
limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2011 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 11
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Subsection 8(10) is repealed and the following substituted:
(10) If a seal on a meter by-pass is opened and/or broken, and
the by-pass valve is opened without the prior written
permission of the City or its authorized agent, the Owner or
Occupant of the lands shall pay an amount equal to two
times the average daily water consumption for the lands
during the time period when the valve was opened. If a full
year's billing history is not available for the lands, the City
will estimate the average daily consumption based on the
average daily consumption of similar customers.
2. Schedule "A" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
3. Schedule "C" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "C" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
4. Schedule liE" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "E" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
5. Schedule "G" to By-law No. R84-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "G" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
6. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2011 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
7. This by-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
8. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
are hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 26th day of January, 2011.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 11
SCHEDULE "A"
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 26, 2011
Water: City of Hamilton
$411.06 per annum, plus applicable taxes.
Note: Sanitary Surcharge is 100% of non-metered water rate for a
combined total non-metered annual water and wastewater rate of
$822.12 per annum, plus applicable taxes.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 11
SCHEDULE "C"
MISCELLANEOUS RATES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 26, 2011
(Referred to in sub-sections 12(6), (7) and (8))
1. Travellnq Shows and Other Temporary Occasions
The deposit required from travellng shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Thousand, Seven Hundred and Fifty Dollars ($5,750.00),
and consists of:
(a) Two Hundred and Seventy-four Dollars ($274.00) as a usage deposit
(to be applied to the cost of temporary connection/ disconnection, the
per diem rental cost for the hydrant adapter and the amount due for
water used); and
(b) Five Thousand, Four Hundred and Seventy-Six Dollars ($5,476.00)
as a damage deposit (refundable upon return to the City of the
hydrant adapter, less any damages incurred).
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 9 of Schedule "E" to this By-
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
2. Public Water Fillinq Stations
(a) The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water
Filling Stations be $1.689 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public
Water Filing Stations are located at:
Cormorant Road, Ancaster
(i)
Dartnall Road, Hamilton.
(ii)
(b) Water Haulage License Fee (includes 2 cards) $186.50
3. Private Water Fillinq Stations
The one time permit fee for new Private Water Filling Stations approved by
the General Manager of Public Works is $1,097.00 and is payable upon
permit application.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 5 of 11
The annual permit fee for both existing Private Water Fillng Stations and
new Private Water Filling Stations approved by the General Manager of
Public Works is $329.00 and is payable within one month of the notification
by the City.
4. Areas Outside the City of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G" to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 6 of 11
SCHEDULE "E"
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES*
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 26, 2011
1. (a) Water Service Permit Fees $78.90
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in clause 4(1 )(b) of By-law R84-026, as
amended:
I Size of Water Meter I Fee
I
16 mm diameter $ 344.00
20 mm diameter $ 387.00
25 mm diameter $ 535.00
38 mm diameter $ 800.00
50 mm diameter $ 958.00
50 mm diameter (compound with strainer)
$ 3,172.00
100 mm diameter (turbine with strainer)
$ 2,993.00
100 mm diameter (compound with strainer)
$ 4,668.00
100 mm diameter (fire service compound)
$ 4,841.00
150 mm diameter (turbine with strainer)
$ 5,165.00
150 mm diameter (compound with strainer)
$ 9,224.00
150 mm diameter (fire service turbine)
$ 5,320.00
150 mm diameter (fire service compound) $10,020.00
200 mm diameter (fire service turbine)
$ 9,248.00
200 mm diameter (fire service compound) $13,710.00
250 mm diameter (fire service compound) $19,497.00
Other sizes and types Cost + 10%
Overhead
2. Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 10% Overhead
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 7 of 11
3. For superintending the laying of a new water service
(a) Regular Inspection - Regular Hours $67.90
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $67.90
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
(c) Regular Inspection - After Hours $104.20
meter, if required): .
4. Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee (not including new water
(a) service replacement of public portion from Omm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $290.80
(b) inspection of service replacement of private portion from
Omm to and including 20mm $219.40
(c) service size upgrade additional fee (based on size and length)
I Upgrade From: I Short Side Long Side
20 mm to 25 mm
$ 26.90 $ 50.50
20 mm to 40 mm $116.70 $215.40
20 mm to 50 mm $288.40 $535.20
25 mm to 40 mm $ 88.60 $164.90
25 mm to 50 mm $261 .40 $484.70
40 mmto 50 mm $172.80 $319.80
5. (a) For turning water off (Regular Hours) $67.90
(b) For turning water off (After Hours) $104.20
6. (a) For turning water on (Regular Hours) $67.90
(b) For turning water on (After Hours) $104.20
7. (a) For turning water off & on during the same call (Regular Hours) $102.00
(b) For turning water off & on during the same call (After Hours) $155.00
8. Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes (hydrant flow test) $98.70
9. For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):**
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnection fee
(a) Connection/Disconnection Fee - Regular Hours $192.00/visit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee - After Hours $290.00/visit
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 8 of 11
(c) Hydrant adapter rental (first 7 days) $75.00/day
(d) Per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental (after first
7 days) $5.50/day
10. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter and Attachments:
Size of Meter Cost
16 mm diameter $ 184.00
20 mm diameter $ 272.50
25 mm diameter $ 338.00
38 mm diameter $ 753.50
50 mm diameter $ 864.50
50 mm diameter (compound) $3,627.00
100 mm diameter (turbine) $3,122.00
100 mm diameter (compound) $ 5,044.00
100 mm diameter (fire service $ 7,910.00
compound)
150 mm diameter (turbine) $ 5,745.00
150 mm diameter (compound) $ 8,742.00
150 mm diameter (fire service $ 8,196.00
turbine)
150 mm diameter (fire service $12,656.00
compound)
200 mm diameter (fire service $11,063.00
turbine)
200 mm diameter (fire service $17,403.00
compound)
250 mm diameter (fire service $24,586.00
compound)
~250 mm diameter (all types) cost + 10%
overhead
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 9 of 11
11. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $127.50
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $188.50
100 mm plus diameter Cost + 10%
overhead
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) Cost +10%
overhead
12. For service calls other than previously specified:
$67.90
(a) Service Call- Regular Hours
(b) Service Call - After Hours $104.20
13. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
14. Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge cost plus 33%
overhead
15. General Administration Fees:
Extra or lost card replacement for water filling stations $43.90
Account Review $96.70
General Request (per hour) $49.50
NSF Cheque $30.20
Permit Cancellation Administration Fee $26.90
Permit Renewal Fee $37.60
16. Discharge of Special Water Service Agreement $350.00
Notes to Schedule "E":
* Plus all applicable taxes.
** This service requires a $5,750.00 deposit ($274.00 usage deposit and
$5,476.00 damage deposit).
"Regular Hours" means 8:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
"After Hours" means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday, Sunday,
public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized or required by
law to be closed.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 10 of 11
SCHEDULE "G"
TABLE OF METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 26. 2011
(Referred to in sub-sections 12(2), (3) & (4) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Charqe
The minimum charge per biling period is as follows:
Minimum
Approved Volumel Approved Minimum
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Rate Bi-Monthly Monthly Rate Volume/Month
15mm $16.16 10 m3 $8.08 5 m3
16 mm $16.16 10 m3 $8.08 5 m3
20mm $16.16 10 m3 $8.08 5 m3
25mm $85.46 30 m3 $42.73 15 m3
38mm $94.94 30 m3 $47.4 7 15 m3
50mm $112.90 30 m3 $56.45 15 m3
75mm $195.58 30 m3 $97.79 15 m3
100 mm $250.52 30 m3 $125.26 15 m3
150 mm $443.28 30 m3 $221.64 15 m3
200 mm $765.42 30 m3 $382.71 15 m3
250 mm $1,178.36 30 m3 $589.18 15 m3
HaldimandlHalton Meter Size
50mm $169.34 30 m3 $ 84.67 15 m3
100 mm $375.78 30 m3 $187.89 15 m3
150 mm $664.96 30 m3 $332.48 15 m3
200 mm $1,148.10 30 m3 $574.05 15 m3
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Water Fees and Charges
Page 11 of 11
B) Consumption Charqe
The consumption charge for the amount of water used over and above the
minimum volume per bi-monthly billing is as follows:
Minimum
Consumption Charge Per
pi-Monthly
Volume Cubic Metre
Residential 10 m3 $1.126;: 10m3
Small Commercial 10 m3 $1.126;: 10m3
Commercial/Industrial 30 m3
$1.126;: 30 m3
Haldimand. Halton & Water Haulers 30 m3 $1.689;: 30 m3
C) SANITARY SURCHARGE IS 100% OF WATER CONSUMPTION (applies
to all metered residential, commercial, industrial and institutional water
consumption).



Content from 11037 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026pdf:
Authority: Issues Committee
Item 3, General
Report 11-001 (FCS11009/ PW11004)
CM: January 26, 2011
Bil No. 037
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-037
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on February 15, 2006, the Council of the City of Hamilon passed
and enacted By-law No. 06-026, which by-law came into force and effect on
March 1, 2006 and may be known and referred to as "The Sewer and Drain By-
law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 26th day of January, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-001 and
did authorize the 2011 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2011 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule "A" to By-law No. 06-026, as amended, is repealed and
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2011 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 4
3. This by-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 06-026, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 26th day of January, 2011.
R. Sratil? lJ~a
Mayor
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Fees andCharges
Page 3 of 4
SCHEDULE "A"
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
Effective January 26,2011
1. Basic Fee for any sewer permit $58.50
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1) of this Schedule "A", the following
fees are payable:
(a) for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
a Sanitary Sewer Lateral- Public portion, or for
either one individually $24.60
(b) for a Storm Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral - Public Portion, or for
either one individually $24.60
(c) for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $24.60
(d) for a Catch basin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral - Private Portion $24.60
(e) inspect Storm Sewer $24.60
(f) inspect Sanitary Sewer $24.60
2. Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral - Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $245.80
Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $36.80
3.
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
4. Service Charge for Missed Appointments $109.70
and Inspections Not Ready.
5. (a) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Regular Hours $426.40
(b) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - After Hours $516.10
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 4
(c) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - Regular Hours $519.00
(d) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $617.10
(e) Investigation- Regular Hours $426.40
Abandoned Sewer Lateral
(f) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation - After Hours $504.90
6. Discharge of Special Service Agreement $350.00
Notes to Schedule "A":
1. All fees and charges in this schedule are subject to all applicable taxes.
2. "Regular Hours" means 7 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
3. "After Hours" means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday,
Sunday, public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized
or required by law to be closed.
4. "Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning" means services to relieve blockage(s) in the
Sewer Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer service.
5. "Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning - Locate" means services to locate any
Defects in the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television inspection.
6. "Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation" means services to complete a
thorough cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer LateraL.
7. "Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation" means services related to an
unsuccessful attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.



Content from 11038 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272pdf:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-001 (FCS11009/PW11004)
CM: January 26, 2011
Bil No. 038
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-038
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as "The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law";
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.D. 2001,
c. 25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 26th day of January, 2011 the Council of the City of
Issues Committee Report 11-001 and
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General
did authorize the 2011 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2011 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272, as amended, is repealed and
1.
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2011 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 4
3. This by-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 26th day of January, 2011.
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 3 of 4
SCHEDULE "B"
Wastewater Abatement Proqram
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $117.08 plus applicable
taxes
(Section 10)
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $351.03 plus applicable
taxes and full cost
(Section 11)
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $468.10 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 1 0 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City's sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A - B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (before phase in)
F% = wastewater Abatement in percentage (after phase in)
A-B=C
Step 1:
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A - D) x 100
A
Step 4: F% = E% x 33.3% (phase-in for 2003)
F% = E% x 66.6% (phase-in for 2004)
F% = E% x 100% (phase-in for 2005 and each calendar year
thereafter)
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law
No. 03-272, as amended, and Implement the 2011 Fees and Charges
Page 4 of 4
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
G = actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the City
during the previous quarter
H = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
I = Sanitary Surcharge (for 2011 is $1.126 per cubic meter of water)
$J = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 5: G x F% = H
Step 6: H x i = $J



Content from 11039 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-001 (FCS11009/ PW11004)
CM: January 26, 2011
Bil No. 039
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-039
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Sewer Use Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law No. 04-150, known and referred to as the "Sewer Use By-law",
which By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.D. 2001,
c.25, as amended, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to
pass by-laws imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done
by or on behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property,
including property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 26th day of January, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-001 and
did authorize the 2011 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
sewer use fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2011 sewer use fees and charges set out herein
has been given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public
Notice Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule "0" to By-law No. 04-150 is repealed and Schedule "0" attached
to this by-law is substituted therefor.
2. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2011 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
3. This by-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150, as amended,
and Implement the 2011 Sewer Use Fees and Charges
Page 2 of 4
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 04-150, as amended, are
hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 26th day of January, 2011.
Mayor
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 26, 2011
1. Annual permit to discharge hauled sewage $277.22*
2. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
discharge:
discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant* compliant*
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 mJ or
gallons or any part any part thereof
$ 41.72 $41 .72
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 41.72 $83.44
less than or equal to
or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 83.44 $125.16
less than or equal to orequal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $125.16 $208.58
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $166.88 $250.30
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10000 imperial m3
gallons
*plus applicable taxes
b) Holding Tanks of Recreational Vehicles
$ 5.50*
3. Overstrength Discharge Fees
Parameter Fee (cents/kg)*
B.O.D. $0.6656
Suspended Solids $0.5323
Solvent Extractable Matter $0.5590
Kjeldahl Nitrogen $2.0265
phosphorus
$1 .4256
4. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (minimum charges per
quarter)
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $273.39*
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $273.39*
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $273.39*
5. Spills Response Fee (per hour) $ 59.12*
6. Information Request Fee $125.78*
7. Wastewater Sampling Fees
(a) Wastewater Sampling Vehicle Fee (per hour) $ 5.61 *
(b) Wastewater Sampling Equipment Fee (per day) $ 15.30*
(c) Wastewater Sampling Technician Fee (per hour) $ 39.57*
*plus applicable taxes



Content from 11057 to amend bylaw no 10221 a bylaw to prescribe standards for the maintenance and occupancy of pr:
Item 2, Planning Committee
Authority:
Report: 11-002 (PED 091165(d))
CM: February 9, 2011
Bill No. 057
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-057
To Amend By-law No. 10-221, a By-law to Prescribe Standards for the Maintenance and
Occupancy of Property
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to prescribe standards for the maintenance and
occupancy of property being City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-221 ;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the amendment of the subsection 24(3) of City of
Hamilton By-law No. 10-221 with respect to the closing of waste chutes;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1 Subsection 24(3) of By-law No. 10-221 is amended by adding the following new
paragraph (c):
(c) the owner has a current and valid permit to close a waste chute
issued by the Director.
and by making the resulting necessary grammatical changes to paragraphs (a) and
(b).
This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
.
PASSED this 9th day of February, 2011
R.
Mayor



Content from 11078 cooling tower registry bylawpdf:
Authority: Item 6, Board of Health Committee
Report: 11-002 (BOH0921 (b))
CM: March 9, 2011
Bill No. 078
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-078
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
WHEREAS Council desires to establish a Cooling Tower Registry to facilitate communication
with owners with respect to controlling the growth of Legionella bacteria and to improve Public
Health Services monitoring of possible sources of exposure to Legionella bacteria;
AND WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, authorize
the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or desirable for municipal purposes, and in
particular paragraphs 5 through 8 of subsection 10(2) authorize by-laws respecting the
economic, social and environmental well-being of the municipality; the health, safety and well-
being of persons; the provision of any service or thing that it considers necessary or desirable
for the public; and the protection of persons and property;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, authorizes the City
of Hamilton to pass by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of
Hamilton passed under that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c. 25, further authorizes the City of
Hamilton, amongst other things, to delegate its authority, to impose fees or charges on persons
for services or activities provided or done by or on behalf of it, to provide for inspections and
inspection orders, and to make orders to discontinue activity or to do work;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
Page 2 of 7
Definitions
In this By-law:
,
"business day" means any day on which the City of Hamilton's administration buildings
are open for business;
"City" means the geographical area of the City of Hamilton or the municipal corporation
as the context requires;
"Cooling Tower" means a device for the lowering the temperature of:
(a) recirculated water by bringing the water into contact with fan-forced or fan-induced
atmospheric air; or
(b) water, a refrigerant or other fluid in a pipe or other container by bringing
recirculated water and fan-forced or fan-induced atmospheric air into contact with
the pipe or other container;
which may or may not share a common reservoir with one or more other Cooling
Towers;
"Log Book" means a book, including but not limited to, an electronic database or
document, kept in a form satisfactory to the Medical Officer of Health, recording the date
and details of all maintenance, including but not limited to any breakdowns and repairs,
carried out on the Cooling Tower and all other actions related to the Risk Management
Plan or otherwise to the control of Legionella bacteria;
"Medical Officer of Health" means the City's Medical Officer of Health or his or her
designate;
"Officer" means a Public Health Inspector or other person appointed or employed by
the City of Hamilton for the enforcement of this By-law and includes the Medical Officer
of Health;
"operator" means the owner or the person in control of a Cooling Tower;
"person" includes but is not limited to an individual, sole proprietorship, partnership,
association or corporation; and
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
Page 3 of 7
"Risk Management Plan" means a plan:
(a) prepared in accordance with standards, guidelines or other similar documents with
respect to controlling the growth Legionella bacteria in Cooling Towers published
by the American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air-Conditioning Engineers
(ASHRAE), the Cooling Technology Institute (CTI) or another such organization or
by the Cooling Tower manufacturer;
(b) describing equipment installed and processes implemented to control the growth
of Legionella bacteria; and
(c) including all of the information required by the Cooling Tower Risk Management
Plan Template provided by the Medical Officer of Health.
Scope
2. This By-lawapplies to all Cooling Towers.
Registration
3. Every owner of a Cooling Tower operating or capable of operating on March 9, 2011
shall register the Cooling Tower with the Medical Officer of Health within 30 days of
March 9, 2011.
Every owner of a Cooling Tower that commences to operate or to be capable of
.
operating after March 9, 2011 shall register the Cooling Tower with the Medical Officer
of Health within 30 days of the date the Cooling Tower commences to be in operation or
to be capable of operating.
5. Every registration expires on May 1 of each year if it is not renewed before that date.
To register or renew a registration, the owner of a Cooling Tower shall complete and
,
submit to the Medical Officer of Health an application approved by the Medical Officer of
Health containing such information as the Medical Officer of Health may require together
with the registration fee, if any.
Every owner shall notify the Medical Officer of Health of any change in circumstances in
,
connection with information given to the Medical Officer of Health under section 6 within
10 business days after the change occurs.
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
Page 4 of 7
General Prohibitions
No person shall operate a Cooling Tower unless the Cooling Tower is registered under
,
this By-law.
Every operator shall ensure that there is a Risk Management Plan in respect of each
,
Cooling Tower they operate.
10. Every operator shall ensure that an up-to-date and legible Log Book is kept in respect of
each Cooling Tower they operate.
11. No person shall enter inaccurate information in a Log Book or falsify, mutilate or deface
a Log Book.
Administration and Enforcement
12. The Medical Officer of Health is authorized to administer and enforce this By-law
including but not limited to prescribing the format and content of any forms or other
documents required under this By-law, including but not limited to the Cooling Tower
Risk Management Plan Template.
13. Registration and other fees under this By-law shall be as set and approved by Council
from time to time under the User Fees and Charges By-law.
14. An Officer may enter on land at any reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an
inspection to determine whether or not the following are being complied with:
(a) this By-law;
(b) a direction or order made under this By-law; or
(c) an order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
15. An Officer may, for the purposes of the inspection under Section 14:
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
Page 5 of 7
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the
purpose of making copies or extracts;
(c) require information in writing or otherwise as required by the Officer from any
person concerning a matter related to the inspection; or
(d)
alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert knowledge,
make examinations or take tests, samples or photographs necessary for the
purposes of the inspection.
16. The City may require the operator of a Cooling Tower to pay any costs incurred by the
City in exercising its authority to inspect under section 15, including but not limited to the
cost of any examination, test, sample or photograph necessary for the purposes of the
inspection.
17. An Officer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an order issued by a provincial
judge or justice of the peace under Section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001 where he or
she has been prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying out an inspection
under Sections 14 and 15.
18. If an Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may
make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the
contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening activity.
19. An order under Section 18 shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention
and the location of the property on which the contravention occurred; and
(b) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
Page 6 of 7
20. If an Officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may
make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the
contravention occurred to do work to correct the contravention.
21. An order under Section 20 shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention
and the location of property on which the contravention occurred;
(b) the work to be completed; and
(c) the date or dates by which the work must be complete.
22. An order to discontinue contravening activity made under Section 18 or an order to do
work made under Section 20 may be served personally or by registered mail to the last
known address of:
(a) the owner or occupier of the property where the contravention occurred; and
(b) such other persons affected by it as the Officer making the order determines.
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place 5 business days after
the date of mailing.
23. In addition to service given in accordance with Section 22, an order to discontinue
contravening activity made under Section 18 or an order to do work made under Section
20 may be served by an Officer placing a placard containing the order in a conspicuous
place on the property where the contravention occurred.
24. Where service cannot be given in accordance with Section 22, sufficient service is
deemed to have taken place when given in accordance with Section 23.
25. Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is, upon conviction, guilty of
an offence and is liable:
(a) on a first conviction, to a fine of not more than $10,000; and
Respecting the Registration of Cooling Towers
Page 7 of 7
(b)
on any subsequent conviction, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
26. Despite section 25, where the person convicted is a corporation:
(a) the maximum fine in subsection 25(a) is $50,000; and
(b) the maximum fine in subsection 25(b) is $100,000.
27. Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction has
been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition to any
other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law, make an order prohibiting the
continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
General Provisions
28. This By-law may be referred to as the Cooling Tower Registry By-law or the Hamilton
Cooling Tower Registry By-law.
29. If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or provisions of this By-law
invalid, it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to be
in force.
Enactment
30. This By-law comes into force on the date of its passing.
PASSED this 9th day of March, 2011.
R. Bratina R 11
Mayor ÿiity Clerk



Content from 11103 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 11, Audit, Finance &
Administration Committee
Report 11-004 (FCS11007)
CM: March 9, 2011
Bill No. 103
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-103
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026,
A By-law Respecting the Management and Maintenance of the Waterworks
Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water Rates and
Charges
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law No. R84-026, being a
by-law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system
of The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of
water rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule “C”, every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001, c.
25 authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws necessary or desirable for
municipal purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 9th day of March, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 11 of Audit, Finance & Administration Committee
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 2 of 12
Report 11-004 and did authorize the amendments to By-law No. R84-026 set out
herein, including but not limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the fees and charges set out herein has been given in
accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice Policy By-
law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 1 of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the
following new section 1:
DEFINITIONS
1. In this By-law, unless the context otherwise requires,
"applicant" means the Owner or his authorized agent who may be
required to sign forms supplied by the City of Hamilton authorizing
various works described in this By-law;
"approved" means having the approval of the General Manager of
Public Works;
"City Council" means the Council of the City of Hamilton;
“City of Hamilton” or “City” means the City of Hamilton as established
on January 1, 2001 under the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999,
c. 14, Schedule “C” and its geographic area;
“City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Arrears Policy” means the
policy approved by City Council at its meeting of October 24, 2007 as
Item 9(a) of Audit and Administration Committee Report 07-012, as
amended or re-enacted from time to time, and any successor to such
policy. This policy may be found at the Office of the City Clerk for the
City of Hamilton;
“City of Hamilton Water Leak Adjustment Policy” means the policy
approved by City Council at its meeting of December 12, 2007 as
Item 11(a) of Audit and Administration Committee Report 07-015, as
amended or re-enacted from time to time, and any successor to such
policy. This policy may be found at the Office of the City Clerk for the
City of Hamilton;
“City of Hamilton Water and Wastewater Consecutive Estimated
Accounts Policy” means the policy approved by City Council at its
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 3 of 12
meeting of May 13, 2009 as Item 9 of the Audit and Administration
Committee Report 09-008, as amended or re-enacted from time to
time, and any successor to such policy. This policy may be found at
the Office of the City Clerk for the City of Hamilton;
"City Solicitor" means the City Solicitor for the City of Hamilton or
such person as is duly authorized to act in his or her stead;
"consumer" means any Owner, tenant or lessee or occupier of
lands who may have occasion to make use of any water service
connection to a property which he, she or it occupies in the course
of his, her or its residence or in the operation of a business;
"General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services" means the
General Manager of Finance and Corporate Services for the City of
Hamilton or the person duly authorized to act in his or her stead for
purposes of this By-law, or successor;
"General Manager of Public Works" means the General Manager of
Public Works for the City of Hamilton or the person duly authorized to
act in his or her stead for purposes of this By-law, or successor;
"legally established income producing rental property" means,
(a) a property listed in the Corporate Services Department of the
City of Hamilton as a multiple family dwelling; or
(b) a property in which the Owner registered on title is different
from the Occupant; or
(c) a rental property in which business taxes are paid;
“Municipal Law Enforcement Officer” means any person appointed
by City Council, by the General Manager of Public Works, or under
this By-law, to administer or enforce this By-law and includes a
person employed by the City of Hamilton whose duties are to
enforce this By-law, and also includes, for the purposes of
exercising any power of entry under this By-law, a police officer;
"Owner" means any registered owner of land or buildings thereon, or
any authorized agent, contractor, employee, tenant or servant
representing such owner, who is responsible for the continued service
of his land with water, which land or buildings are located within the
City of Hamilton and which may be serviced with water from the water
distribution system of the City of Hamilton;
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 4 of 12
"Occupant" means any person who has actual or implied use,
possession or control of any land or buildings thereon located in the
City of Hamilton and which may be serviced with water from the water
distribution system of the City of Hamilton and includes any agent,
servant or employee of such occupant;
"plumber" means any person, group, owner, firm, company,
corporation or contractor who holds himself or themselves out as
plumbers, pipefitters, or earthmoving contractors who engage in the
work of installing pipes for the purpose of carrying potable water;
"premises" means the building or structure which it services with a
water connection from the water distribution system of the City of
Hamilton and which is located on publicly or privately owned property
within the limits of the City of Hamilton;
"prime user" means the premises for which the service connection
was originally installed and which contains the curb stop;
"Private Water Filling Stations" means privately owned and operated
water filling stations;
"Public Water Filling Stations" means the water filling stations
identified in Schedule "C" to this By-law which are owned by the City
of Hamilton;
"service connection" means the service pipe connected to the water
distribution system which is designed to carry water from this system
to the street line, or from the distribution system to the limit of the
Waterworks easement;
"service pipe" means a water pipe connected as described in the
definition of service connection;
"shared service" means a water service which supplies water to more
than one premises which are connected with the yard service or
within a premises and which are controlled by a common curb stop;
"subsequent user" means a premises sharing a yard service with a
prime user;
"Universal Metering Program" means the City of Hamilton's program
to supply and install new water meters, remote water meter reading
receptacles and meter seals on all unmetered properties within the
City of Hamilton by June 30, 2004;
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 5 of 12
“vacant premises” means a premises that is not completely or not
substantially occupied by the Owner or an Occupant authorized by
the Owner for a period of more than 90 consecutive days, but does
not include a premises:
(a) occupied by the Owner or an Occupant authorized by the
Owner on a seasonal basis, or
(b) on property used as a farm, except for a dwelling unit; or
(c) owned by the City of Hamilton;
"Waterworks" means the building, structures, plant, machinery,
equipment, appurtenances, devices, conduits, intakes, outlets,
underground pipelines and installations, and other works designed for
the production, treatment, transmission, distribution and storage of
water, and includes lands occupied for such purposes and uses;
"yard service" means the service pipe connected to the service
connection at the street line or limit of the Waterworks easement,
which is designed to carry water from the street line, or the limits of
the Waterworks easement, to lands or buildings.
2. Section 3 of By-law No. R84-026 is amended by adding the following
subsections 3(4) to (21):
(4) All Municipal Law Enforcement Officers are authorized to enforce
this By-law.
(5) The General Manager of Public Works is authorized to delegate the
responsibility for the administration of this By-law to any employee
or agent of the Environment & Sustainable Infrastructure Division of
the Public Works Department of the City.
(6) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may enter on land at any
reasonable time for the purpose of carrying out an inspection to
determine whether or not the following are complied with:
1. this By-law;
2. any direction, requirement or order of the City made under
this By-law; or
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 6 of 12
3. an order made under s. 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001 in
respect of a contravention of this by-law.
(7) For the purposes of an inspection under subsection 3(6), a
Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may,
1. require the production for inspection of documents or things
relevant to the inspection;
2. inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the
inspection for the purpose of making copies or extracts;
3. require information in writing or otherwise as required by the
Municipal Law Enforcement Officer from any person
concerning a matter related to the inspection; and
4. alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or
expert knowledge, make examinations or take tests,
samples or photographs necessary for the purpose of the
inspection.
(8) A Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may undertake an inspection
pursuant to an order issued by a provincial judge or justice of the
peace under section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001 where he or
she has been prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying
out an inspection under subsection 3(6) and 3(7).
(9) If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a
contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may make an
order requiring the person who contravened this By-law or who
caused or permitted the contravention, or the Owner or Occupant of
the property on which the contravention occurred to discontinue the
contravening activity.
(10) An order under subsection 3(9) shall set out:
1. reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to
identify the contravention and the location of the property on
which the contravention occurred; and
2. the date and time by which there must be compliance with
the order, which may be of immediate effect should the
Municipal Law Enforcement Officer determine that the
circumstances warrant.
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 7 of 12
(11) If a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer is satisfied that a
contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may make an
order requiring the person who contravened this By-law or who
caused or permitted the contravention or the Owner or Occupant of
the property on which the contravention occurred to do the work to
correct the contravention.
(12) An order under subsection 3(11) shall set out:
1. reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to
identify the contravention and the location of the property on
which the contravention occurred; and
2. the work to be completed which may include but is not
limited to requiring that:
(a) prior to performing any work, all necessary permits or
other approvals be applied for and obtained;
(b) examinations or tests be conducted for the purpose of
determining the cause of the contravention and/or the
remedial measures that are necessary to correct the
contravention, and that such examinations or tests be
supplied to the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer
together with any accompanying reports required in
the order;
(c) arrangements be made for the shutting off of the
supply of water from the City's water distribution
system until the work ordered to be done is
completed; and
3. the date and time by which the work must be completed,
which may be of immediate effect should the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer determine that the circumstances
warrant.
(13) An order to discontinue a contravening activity made under
subsection 3(10) or an order to do work made under subsection 3(12)
may be served personally or by registered mail to the last known
address of:
1. the Owner or Occupant of the property where the contravention
occurred; and
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 8 of 12
2. such other persons affected by the order as the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer making the order determines.
Service by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place five
business days after the date of mailing.
(14) In addition to service given in accordance with subsection 3(13), an
order to discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection
3(10) or an order to do work made under subsection 3(12) may be
served by a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer placing a placard
containing the order in a conspicuous place on the property where
the contravention occurred.
(15) Where service cannot be given in accordance with subsection 3(13),
sufficient service is deemed to have taken place when given in
accordance with subsection 3(14).
(16) No person shall remove an order, notice, direction or placard posted
on a property indicating that it was posted under this By-law, except a
Municipal Law Enforcement Officer.
(17) Where a time frame is set out in an order for carrying out any action,
the Municipal Law Enforcement Officer may extend the time for
compliance beyond the established time frame provided such
extension is required and is acceptable to the Municipal Law
Enforcement Officer.
(18) Where a person does not comply with a direction or a requirement,
including an order, under this By-law to do a matter or thing, the
General Manager of Public Works, with such assistance by others as
may be required, may carry out such direction, requirement or order
at the person’s expense.
(19) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under
subsection 3(18) by action or by adding the costs to the tax roll and
collecting them in the same manner as property taxes and such costs
shall include an interest rate of 15 percent commencing on the day
the City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs, including
the interest, are paid in full.
(20) The General Manager of Public Works is authorized to give
immediate effect to any direction or requirement where the costs of
carrying out the direction or requirement do not exceed $10,000 and,
where the costs do exceed $10,000, as the City’s council may
authorize.
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 9 of 12
(21) The amount of the City’s costs including interest to the date payment
is made in full constitutes a lien upon the land, upon the registration
of a notice of lien upon the land.
3. Subsections 8(10), (11) and (12) of By-law No. R84-026 are deleted and
replaced with the following subsections 8(10), (11), (12) and (13):
(10) If a seal on a meter by-pass for a non-residential property is
opened and/or broken, without the prior written permission of the
City or its authorized agent, the Owner or Occupant of the property
shall pay an amount equal to up to three times the average daily
water consumption for the property during the time period when the
valve was opened. If a full year’s billing history is not available for
the property, the City will estimate the average daily water
consumption based on the average daily water consumption of
similar customers. Upon the request of the City, the Owner shall
install metering equipment on the by-pass valve within 60 days of
such request and shall be responsible for all charges and fees
associated with it.
(11) If an existing water meter and/or house piping of a residential
property have been altered to by-pass the water meter and to allow
for non-metered water to be drawn, without the prior permission of
the City or its authorized agent, the Owner or Occupant shall pay
an amount equal to up to three times the average daily water
consumption for the property during the time period that the
alteration occurred and until the 60 day period referred to in
subsection (a) has expired. If a full year’s billing history is not
available for the property, then the City will estimate the average
daily water consumption for the property based on the average
daily water consumption of similar customers. In such a situation,
the Owner shall also:
(a) within 60 days of a request by the City, restore the water
metering equipment or house piping, or both, to current City
specifications, at the Owner’s cost and expense, including
but not limited to the cost of any required permits, the cost to
replace any damaged water meter and the cost of any
inspections by the City to ensure that the restoration work
has been completed to its satisfaction; or
(b) where the Owner has failed to comply with subsection (a),
pay an amount equal to two times the non-metered annual
rate set out in Schedule “A” to this By-law, until such time as
the Owner complies with subsection (a).
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 10 of 12
(12) Fees for the supply and installation of water meters and remote
readers are to be paid by the Owner of the premises and are set
forth in Section 1 of Schedule “E” to this By-law.
(13) No person shall break, damage, destroy, deface or tamper or cause
or permit the breaking, damaging, destroying defacing or tampering
with:
(a) any part of the Waterworks; or
(b) any permanent or temporary device installed in a
Waterworks or in a yard service, including a water meter, for
the purpose of measuring, sampling and testing of the water.
4. Subsection 12(5) of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the
following subsection:
(5) A non-metered residential property may remain non-metered only
where, in the opinion of the General Manager of Public Works, it is
determined that a water meter cannot be installed on or at the
property. In such a case, the Owner or Occupant of the property shall
be liable to pay a non-metered annual rate as set forth in Schedule
“A” to this By-law.
5. Subsections 12(9) and (10) of By-law No. R84-026 are deleted and
replaced with the following subsections:
Rates Where Failure to Comply
(9) Where the Owner of a non-residential property has failed to permit
the installation of a water meter and remote reading device required
under this By-law, the Owner shall pay an amount equal to up to
two times the historical average daily water consumption of similar
customers until such time as the water meter and remote reading
device are installed to the satisfaction of the City of Hamilton.
(10) Where the Owner of a residential property has failed to permit the
installation of a water meter and remote reading device required
under this By-law, the Owner shall pay an amount equal to up to
three times the non-metered annual flat rate as set forth in
Schedule “A” to this By-law, unless the General Manager of Public
Works determines that a water meter cannot be installed.
6. Subsection 12(11) of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted in its entirety and
subsections 12(12) and (13) are re-numbered as subsections 12(11) and
(12).
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 11 of 12
7. Subsection 18(4) of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the
following subsection:
(4) (a) Whenever any premises having a water service becomes a
vacant premises, the Owner of the vacant premises shall,
within 24 hours of the vacancy notify the General Manager of
Public Works, in writing, to shut off the water at the street
line, and shall pay:
(i) the fee for turning the water off in the amount set forth
in Schedule “E” to this By-law, and when the premises
is no longer a vacant premises, the applicable fee is
to be paid by the Owner for turning the water on again
as set forth in Schedule “E” to this By-law; and
(ii) the minimum charge portion of the metered water
rates as set forth in Schedule “G” to this By-law during
the time period that the water is shut off.
(b) Where the Owner of a vacant premises fails to notify the
General Manager of Public Works as set out in subsection
(a), the City of Hamilton may, once aware of the vacant
premises and upon at least 24 hours of notification to the
Owner, shut off the water at the street line. In such event,
the City of Hamilton will not be liable for any loss or
damages to any equipment, such as boilers, resulting from
shutting off the water service. However, the Owner shall pay
the fee for such turning water off service as set forth in
Schedule “E” to this By-law.
8. Section 22 of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the
following section:
22. (a) Any person who contravenes an order made under this By-
law, or an officer or director of a corporation who knowingly
concurs in such a contravention by the corporation, is guilty
of a continuing offence and upon conviction is liable to a
daily fine or penalty of a maximum of $10,000, as provided in
the Municipal Act, 2001, for each day or part of a day that
the offence continues, and despite section 21, the total of all
of the daily fines imposed for an offence is not limited by the
fine amount permitted under that section.
(b) Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court
in which the conviction has been entered and any court of
A By-law to Amend By-law No. R84-026, A By-law Respecting the Management and
Maintenance of the Waterworks Systems of the City of Hamilton and the Establishment of Water
Rates and Charges
Page 12 of 12
competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition to any
other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law,
make an order prohibiting the continuation or repetition of
the offence by the person convicted.
9. This by-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
10. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. R84-026, as amended,
are hereby confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 13th day of April, 2011.
R. Brÿ /ÿÿÿ-"ÿ
Mayor



Content from 11111 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businesses and to amend bylaw :
Authority: Item 5, Planning Committee
Report: 11-007 (PED 10063(b)
CM: April 13, 2011
Bill No. 111
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-111
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
and
To Amend By-law No. 10-221, a By-law to Prescribe Standards for the
Maintenance and Occupancy of Property.
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton enacted a by-law to license and regulate
various businesses being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton enacted a by-law to prescribe
standards for the maintenance and occupancy of property being City of Hamilton By-
law No. 10-221;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for various housekeeping and technical
amendments to City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS the amendment to City of Hamilton By-law No. 01-170 adding a
requirement for a visual barrier to Schedule 22 necessitates the deletion of this
requirement from City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-221 ;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for various housekeeping and technical
amendments to City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-221;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
By-law No. 07-170
1. Paragraph 1(1)(g) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 2 of 10
and the subsequent paragraphs relettered accordingly.
Subsection 5(1) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended
.
by deleting the word "declarations" and replacing it with "certifications".
Paragraph 6(1)(d) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is
,
amended by deleting the word "declarations" and replacing it with
"certifications".
Subsection 15(1) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended
.
by deleting the words "Appendices "C" and "D" to this By-law" and replacing
them with "Appendices "A" and "B" to these General Provisions".
Section 19 of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
,
adding the following new subsection 19(5):
(5) On behalf of the City Clerk, the Issuer of Licences may sign a
statement as to the licensing or non-licensing of any premises or
person under this By-law as provided for under subsection
447.6(4) of the Municipal Act, 2001.
Subsection 27(1) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended
°
by deleting the words "Schedules 1 and 4" and replacing them with "Schedule
1 or 4".
Subsections 7(2), (3), (4) and (5) of Schedule 1 of By-law No. 07-170 are
.
deleted and replaced by the following new subsections 7(2), (3), (4), (5) and
(6):
(2) Council may consider a request to substitute a new location for
an existing adult services entertainment establishment location
provided that any requested new location shall be located
entirely within the area shown on Map 1 or the area shown on
Map 2 attached to and forming part of this Schedule.
(3) Despite subsection 7(2), the premises at the following municipal
addresses licensed and in actual use as a adult services
entertainment establishment on April 14, 2010, are each deemed
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 3 of 10
to be a location where one adult services entertainment
establishment is permitted to operate and eligible to be licensed
only for so long as the premises continues to be used for such
purposes, the business owner maintains their licence and the
business carried on therein is in compliance with this By-law and
all other applicable law:
(a) 92 Barton Street East, Hamilton;
(b) 1038 Barton Street East, Hamilton.
(4) No new business owner licence shall be issued for a location
listed in subsection 7(3).
(s) When an adult services entertainment establishment business
owner licence expires and is not or cannot be renewed or such
licence is otherwise surrendered or revoked, then upon receipt of
a complete application which otherwise complies with this By-
law, the Issuer of Licences shall carry out a selection process for
a licence as follows:
(a) the available business owner licence shall be advertised in
the Hamilton Spectator newspaper and on the City's
website inviting the submission of applications within a
specified period of time;
(b) a draw shall be conducted from all of the submitted,
complete applications which otherwise comply with this
By-law; and
(c) the winner of the draw may be issued a business owner
licence for an existing or new location provided that such
existing or new location conforms to subsection 7(2) and
is approved by Council.
(6) No business owner shall have an interest, whether as a
corporation, a partnership or an individual, in more than one
adult services entertainment establishment business owner
licence.
Subsections 10(2), (3), (4) and (5) of Schedule 1 of By-law No. 07-170 are
,
deleted and replaced by the following new subsections 10(2), (3), (4), (5) and
(6):
(2) Council may consider a request to substitute a new location for
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 4 of 10
an existing Class A adult film store location provided that any
requested new location shall be located entirely within the area
shown on Map 1 or the area shown on Map 2 attached to and
forming part of this Schedule.
(3) Despite subsection 10(2), the premises at the following
municipal addresses licensed and in actual use as a Class A
adult film store on April 14, 2010, are each deemed to be a
location where one Class A adult film store is permitted to
operate and eligible to be licensed only for so long as the
premises continues to be used for such purposes, the licence
holder maintains their licence and the business carried on
therein is in compliance with this By-law and all other
applicable law:
(a) 8 Fennell Avenue West, Hamilton;
(b) 128 Parkdale Avenue North, Hamilton.
(4) No new licence shall be issued for a location listed in
subsection 10(3).
(s) When a Class A adult film store licence expires and is not or
cannot be renewed or such licence is otherwise surrendered or
revoked, then upon receipt of a complete application which
otherwise complies with this By-law, the Issuer of Licences
shall carry out a selection process for a licence as follows:
(a) the available licence shall be advertised in the Hamilton
Spectator newspaper and on the City's website inviting
the submission of applications within a specified period
of time;
(b) a draw shall be conducted from all of the submitted,
complete applications which otherwise comply with this
By-law; and
(c) the winner of the draw may be issued a licence for an
existing or new location provided that such existing or
new location conforms to subsection 10(2) and is
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 5 of 10
approved by Council..
(6) No licence shall be issued under subsection 10(5) to an
applicant who has an interest, whether as a corporation, a
partnership or an individual, in a current and valid Class A adult
film store licence.
Schedule 1 of By-law 07-170 is amended by attaching Map 1 and Map 2
,
attached as Appendix 1 to this By-law.
10. Subsections 3(2), (3), (4) and (5) of Schedule 4 of By-law No. 07-170 are
deleted and replaced by the following new subsections 3(2), (3), (4), (5) and
(6):
(2)
Council may consider a request to substitute a new location for
an existing body-rub parlour location provided that any
requested new location shall be located entirely within the area
shown on Map 1 or the area shown on Map 2 attached to and
forming part of this Schedule.
(3) Despite subsection 3(2), the premises at the following
municipal addresses licensed and in actual use as a body-rub
parlour on April 14, 2010, are each deemed to be a location
where one body-rub parlour is permitted to operate and eligible
to be licensed only for so long as the premises continues to be
used for such purposes, the business owner maintains their
licence and the business carried on therein is in compliance
with this By-law and all other applicable law:
(a) 893 King Street East, Hamilton;
(b) 549 Kenilworth Avenue North, Hamilton.
(4) No new business owner licence shall be issued for a location
listed in subsection 3(3).
(s) When a body-rub parlour business owner licence expires and is
not or cannot be renewed or such licence is otherwise
surrendered or revoked, then upon receipt of a complete
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 6 of 10
application which otherwise complies with this By-law, the
Issuer of Licences shall carry out a selection process for a
licence as follows:
(a) the available business owner licence shall be advertised
in the Hamilton Spectator newspaper and on the City's
website inviting the submission of applications within a
specified period of time;
(b) a draw shall be conducted from all of the submitted,
complete applications which otherwise comply with this
By-law; and
(c) the winner of the draw may be issued a business owner
licence for an existing or new location provided that
such existing or new location conforms to subsection
3(2) and is approved by Council.
(6) No business owner shall have an interest, whether as a
corporation, a partnership or an individual, in more than one
body-rub parlour business owner licence.
11. Subsections 6(1) and 7(1) of Schedule 4 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
the deleting each occurrence of the word "declaration" and replacing it with
"certification".
12. Schedule 4 of By-law 07-170 is amended by attaching the Map 1 and Map 2
attached as Appendix 2 to this By-law.
13. Paragraph 14(2)(d) of Schedule 4 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting each occurrence of the words "statutory declaration" and replacing
them with "certification".
14. Subsection 5(b) of Schedule 12 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by deleting
the words "zoning by-law of the former municipality, in which the place where
goods are offered for sale, is located" and replacing them with "applicable
zoning by-law".
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 7 of 10
15. Subsections 3(a) and 3(b) of Schedule 14 4(2) of By-law No. 07-170 are
amended by deleting the word "fifteen" in each and replacing it with "thirty".
16. Paragraph 5(3)(d) of Schedule 16 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting the words "of the former municipality in which the premises are
located".
17. Section 6 of Schedule 22 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by adding the
following new subsection 6(g):
Visual Barrier
(g)(i) That a visual barrier be installed and maintained between any
outdoor area used for their business and all adjoining
properties including all adjoining road allowance and that:
(ii) the visual barrier be not less than 2 m in height;
(iii) all material related to the use of a property as a salvage or
second-hand goods shop or yard that is not located indoors be:
1. enclosed within the visual barrier;
2. located not less than 1 m from the visual barrier; and
3. where located between 1 m and 5 m from the visual
barrier, no higher than the visual barrier.
(iv) all activity related to the use of a property as a salvage or
second hand goods shop or yard that is not located indoors be
enclosed within the visual barrier.
(v) any opening required in the visual barrier for ingress or egress
be covered by a gate that:
1. is the same height as the visual barrier;
2. does not open over a traveled portion of road allowance
including a sidewalk; and
3. is kept clear of obstructions so that the gate may be
opened fully at any time.
18. Schedule 22 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by adding the following new
section 7:
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 8 of 10
7(1) For the purposes of subsection 6(g), "visual barrier" means a
barrier that acts as a screen consisting of:
(a) a wall or fence;
(b) a continuous planting of suitable and healthy trees or
shrubs;
(c) an earth berm; or
(d) any combination of the above.
(2) No visual barrier under subsection 6(g) shall be in
contravention of any other applicable by-law.
(3) Where a zoning by-law, site plan or subdivision agreement
entered into under the Planninq Act requires a visual barrier,
the requirement in such zoning by-law, site plan or subdivision
agreement prevails in the event of a conflict with subsection
6(g).
19. Subsection 3(b) of Schedule 23 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by deleting
the words "of the former municipality in which the property is located".
20. Subsection 4(c) and 4(d) of Schedule 23 of By-law No. 07-170 are amended
by deleting the words "of the former municipality in which the property, upon
which seasonal produce is offered for sale, is located".
21. Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by deleting each occurrence
of the "sworn declaration" and replacing them with "certification".
22. Subsection 3(b) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by deleting
the phrase ", from any point within the City to any point outside the City".
23. Section 11 of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by adding the
following new subsection 11(12):
(12) Except when an on-board camera is being serviced in
accordance with this Schedule and the City's Access and
Privacy Policy for Security Cameras in Taxicabs:
(a) no person shall damage, tamper with or obstruct the
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 9 of 10
view of such on-board camera;
(b) no taxicab driver, taxicab owner or taxicab broker shall
permit any person to damage, tamper with or obstruct
the view of such on-board camera.
24. Sections 33 to 42, both inclusive, of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 are
deleted.
25. Subsection 64(1) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by adding
the following new paragraph (o.1) after paragraph (o):
(o.1) ensure that before the on-board camera required under
paragraph 64(1)(o)(i) is serviced, the contractor has entered
into a confidentiality agreement with the City as provided for in
the City's Access and Privacy Policy for Security Cameras in
Taxicabs;
26. Appendix 1 (Taxicab Tariff/Fares) of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 is
amended by deleting the words "Federal Goods and Services Tax" and
replacing them with "Harmonized Sales Tax".
27. Subsection 3.1(d) of Schedule 26 of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
deleting the words "solemn declaration" and replacing them with
"certification".
By-law No. 10-221
28. Subsection 9(1) of By-law No. 10-221 is deleted and replaced with following
new subsection 9(1):
9(1)(a) A door, window, hatch or other opening and its frame shall be
maintained to properly perform its intended functions and
repaired or replaced if damaged including but not limited to
an exterior door, window, hatch or other opening and its
frame being constructed to minimize drafts and heat loss
To Amend By-law Nos. 07-170 and. 10-221
Page 10 of 10
through the infiltration of outside cold air.
(b) For the purposes of paragraph 9(1)(a) "damaged". includes but
is not limited to:
(i) rotted or missing weather-stripping, caulking or
hardware; or
(ii) broken or missing glass.
29. Subsection 22(3) of By-law No. 10-221 is deleted and the subsequent
subsection renumbered accordingly.
30. Subsection 22(4) of By-law No. 10-221, renumbered as subsection 22(3), is
deleted and replaced with the following new subsection 22(3):
22(3) Where a zoning by-law, site plan or subdivision agreement
entered into under the Planning Act requires a visual barrier,
the requirement in such zoning by-law, site plan or
subdivision agreement prevails in the event of a conflict with
subsection 22(2).
31. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 13th day of April, 2011.
R.
C
Mayor
t
RYMAL RD E
Legend
D reaA pdueltr mSeirtvtiicneg
Entertainment
Establishments,
Body-rub Parlour,
Class A Adult Film
Establishments
Map I
JFebruaÿt 20tl .....
Hamilton
oÿ To sraÿ
I
pLANNING AN D ECONOMIC DEVELOPM£NT DEPARTÿ
© Teranet Land lnformafJÿn Seÿces lnc.and ÿts licemor&
! r2OlO]MayNotbeReproduoedwi#loutpemÿssion,
QUEEN ELIZABETH WY
/
i
I
J
LU
Z
Y
©
Z
LU
-- T
Legend
D rea permitting
Adult Service
Entertainment
Establishments,
Body-rub Parlour,
Class A Adult Film
Establishments
/
F Map 2
L__
@
i I Date:
JFebrualy2011
i
t .........
Hamilton
PLANNING AN D ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPARTMENT
@ Teraneÿ Land I nforrna#on Senÿces Inc, and #s licensor&
[2010] May Not be Rel)roduced w#hoot Pernÿsÿon.
THIS IS NOT A PLAN OF SURVEY



Content from 11211 to amend sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 10, General Issues Committee
Report 11-025 (PW11055)
CM: August 11,2011
Bill No. 211
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-211
To Amend By-law No. 04-150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharge of any Matter
into the Sanitary, Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and enacted By-law No. 04-150,
known and referred to as the "Sewer Use By-law", which came into force on June 30,
2004;
AND WHEREAS at its meeting of August 11,2011, the Council of the City of Hamilton
did approve of Item 5 of the General Issues Committee Report 11-025 and did thereby
authorize the amendments to the Sewer Use By-law contained in this By-law;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Section 1 of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by adding the following definition:
,
"recreational vehicle" means a vehicle, including a trailer, designed as a living
space and which contains a holding tank that stores domestic sewage;
Section 1 of By-law No. 04-150 is amended by deleting the definition of "Total
2,
PAHs" and replacing it with the following:
"Total PAHs" means the total of all the following polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons: anthracene, benzo(a)pyrene, benzo(a)anthracene, benzo(e)pyrene,
benzo(b)fluoranthene, benzo(j)fluoranthene, benzo(k)fluoranthene, benzo(g,h,i)pery
lene, chrysene, dibenzo(a,h)anthracene, dibenzo(a,i)pyrene, dibenzo(a,j)acridine,
7H-dibenzo(c,g)carbazole, dinitropyrene, fluoranthene, indeno(1,2,3-c,d)pyrene,
perylene, phenanthrene and pyrene, as determined by Standard Methods;
3. Subsection 13(1) of By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the following:
To Amend By-law No. 04--150, a By-Law to Regulate the Discharÿjerof any Matter into the Sanitary,
Combined and Storm Sewer Systems of the City of Hamilton
Page 2 of 2
13(1) Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is guilty of an
offence and upon conviction is liable:
on a first conviction, for each day or part of a day on which the offence
,
occurs or continues, to a fine of not more than $10,000; and
on any subsequent conviction, for each day or part of a day on which the
.
offence occurs or continues, to a fine of not more than $25,000.
Schedule J - Letter of Agreement for Compliance Program to By-law No. 04-150
,
is amended by deleting items a to h under the first column entitled "Compliance
Program Activities" and by replacing those items with the following instruction:
"List each proposed compliance program activity".
The second paragraph of Schedule J-1 - Release and Indemnification Form to
,
By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the following new paragraph:
AND further (insert XXX) hereby agrees to indemnify, defend and hold harmless
the City, its officers, officials, employees, servants and agents, from and against
any and all claims, demands, actions, causes of action, interest, costs, damages,
expenses, fines, penalties, loss, suits or other proceedings for loss, damage,
injury or death which the City suffers or incurs or is liable for by reason of the
discharge Of such sewage pursuant to the Letter of Agreement, no matter how
caused, except to the extent the loss, damage, injury or death is attributable to or
caused by the negligence of the City, its officers, officials, employees, servants or
agents, or any of them.
6. This by-law shall come into force on the day that it is passed.
PASSED this 1 lth day of August, 2011.
R. Bratina
Mayor ;lerk
2



Content from 11230 to amend bylaws for various housekeeping and technical amendmentspdf:
Authority: Item 5, Planning Committee
Report 11-016 (PED10063(d))
CM: September 28, 2011
Bill No. 230
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-230
To Amend:
By-law No. 10-142, a By-law to Regulate Fences;
By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various Businesses;
By-law No. 10-118, a By-law to regulate Exterior Property Maintenance
By-law No. 10-197, a By-law to Regulate Signs; and
By-law No. 10-260, a By-law to Regulate Vacant Buildings
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton enacted a by-law to regulate fences being
City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-142, a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170, a by-law to regulate exterior property
maintenance being City of Hamilton by-law No. 10-118, a by-law to regulate signs,
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-197; and a by-law to regulate vacant building,
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-260;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for various housekeeping and technical
amendments to City of Hamilton By-laws Nos. 10-142, 07-170, 10-118,10-197 and 10-
260;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Page 2 of 4
By-law No. 10-142, Fence By-law
Subsection 5(1) of By-law No. 10-142 is deleted and replaced by the following
,
new subsection 5(1):
5(1) Despite any provision of this By-law, in the event of conflict between
this By-law and:
(a) an agreement entered into with the City under sections 41 or
51 of the Planninq Act or any plan approved by the City, the
agreement entered into with the City under sections 41 or 51
of the Planninq Act or any plan approved by the City prevails
over this By-law to the extent of the conflict;
(b) a City zoning by-law, the City zoning by-law prevails over this
By-law to the extent of the conflict; or
(c)
The Swimming Pool Enclosure By-law, The Swimming Pool
Enclosure By-law prevails over this By-law to the extent of the
conflict,
but in all other respects, this By-law applies.
, Subsection 6(15) of By-law No. 10-142 is amended by deleting the words "is,
upon conviction, guilty of an offence and" and replacing them with "is guilty of an
offence and upon conviction".
By-law No. 07-170, Licensing By-law
Paragraph 12(1)(b) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted
.
and replaced with the following new paragraph 12(1)(b):
(b) refuse to issue the !icence where:
(i) the requirements for the applicant or applicable licence under
this By-law, including those imposed by any Schedule, or
conditions to be met, are not met;
(ii) the application contains false or misleading information;
(iii) any fees under the User Fees and Charges By.law owed by
Page 3 of 4
the applicant with respect to the carrying of the business
have not been paid;
(iv) any fines for a conviction under the Provincial Offences Act
owed by the applicant have not been paid;
(v) any prohibition or other court orders made upon a conviction
of the applicant have not been complied with;
Subsections 27(1) and (2) of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 are
.
amended by deleting the words "is upon conviction guilty of an offence and" and
replacing them with "is guilty of an offence and upon conviction".
Sections 71 to 80, both inclusive, of Schedule 25 of By-law No. 07-170 are
.
deleted.
By-law No. 10-118, Yard Maintenance By-law
Subsection 10(15) of By-law No. 10-118 is amended by deleting the words by
,
deleting the words "is, upon conviction, guilty of an offence and" and replacing
them with "is guilty of an offence and upon conviction".
By-law No. 10-197, Sign By-law
Subclause 5.11.2(e)(ii)2 of By-law No. 10-197 is amended by deleting "1 m" and
,
replacing it with "1.5 m".
Section 7.1 of By-law No. 10-197 is amended by adding the words "or fails to
.
comply with an order made under this By-law" after "any provision of this By-
law".
Page 4 of 4
By-law No. 10-260, Vacant Buildin_q By-law
Section 9 of By-law No. 10-260 is amended by adding the following new
°
subsection 9(a) and relettering the subsequent subsections accordingly:
(a) "ensure that the vacant building is registered in accordance with
this By-law;"
10. Section 26 of By-law No. 10-260 is amended by deleting the words "is, upon
conviction, guilty of an offence and" and replacing them with "or fails to comply
with an order made under this By-law is guilty of an offence and upon
conviction".
11. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 28th day of September, 2011.
R. Bratina M. Gallagher /
Mayor Acting City Clerk



Content from 11262 to amend the site alteration bylaw no 03126pdf:
Authority: Item 8, Planning Committee
Report: 11-018, (PED10091 (d))
CM: October 26, 2011
Bill No. 262
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-262
To Amend the Site Alteration By-law No. 03-126, as amended
WHEREAS Council deems it necessary to .further amend By-law No. 03-126 dealing
with site alteration of property grades and the placing or dumping of fill and removal of
topsoil;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Paragraph "u" of Section 2 of By-law No. 03-126, as amended, is hereby repealed
and replaced with the following, namely:
(u) "watercourse" means an identifiable depression in the ground, such as;
ditches, swales, and culverts, in which a natural flow of water regularly or
continuously occurs;
Section 2 of By-law 03-126, as amended, is hereby amended by adding the
,
following paragraphs thereto, namely:
(v) "adjacent lands" means any lot, block, section, or parcel of property,
owned by a person other than the applicant, that shares a property
boundary with the applicant;
(w) "agricultural" means all lands that are intended for use of farming as
registered under Farm Registration and Farm Organizations Act, 1993,
S.O. 1993, c21, as amended, for growing crops, including nursery and
horticultural crops; raising livestock for the use of food, fur or fibre,
including poultry and fish; aquaculture; apiares; agro-forestry; maple
syrup production;
(x) "City" means City of Hamilton;
To Amend the Site Alteration By-law No. 03-126, as amended
Page 2 of 3
(Y) "Conservation Authority" means a body corporate established pursuant
to the provisions of the Conservation Authorities Act, R.S.O. 1990, c.27,
as amended; and
(z) "contaminated fill" means impure or unsuitable materials including soil,
stone, concrete, asphalt, sod or tuff, etc. that is in contact with or mixed
with something unclean, harmful, unusable or biodegradable;
(aa) "drainage work" means the implementation of a system intended for
the control of water flow;
(bb) "swale" means a depressed tract of land that is sloped to channel
storm water run-off in a desired direction; and,
(cc) "vegetation" means refers to trees, shrubs or other plant life found
within a defined geographic location; i.e. the construction site;
The first paragraph of Subsection 3.3 of By-Law No. 03-126 is hereby deleted
,
and the following substituted therefore, namely:
Sub-sections 3.1 and 3.2 do not apply on any land in the City of Hamilton zoned
for agricultural use, or any land zoned for residential use within the Urban Area of
the City of Hamilton as designated in the City's Urban Official Plan, where the
quantity of fill or topsoil removed or dumped on any one lot does not, in any
consecutive three month period exceed 8 cubic meters for each 0.125 hectares
of lot area or part thereof, provided the following requirements are met:
Section 3 of By-law No. 03-126 is hereby amended by adding thereto a new
.
subsection 16 as follows, namely:
3.16 Notwithstanding Section 9.1 below, no permit shall be issued under this by-
law for the placing, dumping or removal of any fill or topsoil, or the alteration of
any grade on any land which, on the date of the application for the said permit, is
the subject of or included within any application to the City of Hamilton under the
Planning Act for approval of a site plan, a draft plan of subdivision or a draft plan
of condominium.
Clause (vii) of paragraph 9.1(d) of By-law No. 03-126 is hereby amended by
.
inserting the words "or detrimental effects on amenities" between the word
"conditions" and the word "for" in the first line thereof.
To Amend the Site Alteration By-law No. 03-126, as amended
Page 3 of 3
Paragraph (d) of Sub-section 9.1 is hereby further amended by adding the
.
following clauses thereto, namely:
(viii) flooding or ponding on adjacent lands;
(ix) hindering the orderly development of adjacent lands;
(x) blockage of a storm drainage system;
(xi) unnecessary damage to or destruction of trees;" or
(xii) detrimental effect on quality or quantity of well water.
Paragraph (a) of Section 2 of Appendix "B" to By-law 03-126 is hereby amended
,
by deleting the word "sit" from the fourth line thereof and replacing it with the
word "site".
In all other respects By-law No. 03-126, as amended, is hereby confirmed
.
without change.
9. This by-law shall come into force and effect upon enactment.
PASSED this 26th day of October, 2011.
R. Bratina
Mayor



Content from 11285 noise control bylawpdf:
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-285
NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW
BEING A BY-LAW TO REGULATE NOISE
CONSOLIDATION
This By-Law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by those amending by-laws listed on
the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of convenience only and is not the official or
legal version of the by-law. For accurate reference to the by-law, certified copies should be obtained through
the City Clerk’s office.
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 1 of 12
CITY OF HAMILTON
CONSOLIDATED BY-LAW NO. 11-285
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-Law No: Effective Date Report No.:
14-320 December 17, 2014 LS14037
14-321 December 17, 2014 PED14253
17-068 April 26, 2017 PED16155a
21-199 October 27, 2021 PED21166
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 2 of 12
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-285
NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW
To control noise in the City of Hamilton
WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorize the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws
necessary or desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 5, 6, 8 and 9 of subsection
10(2) authorize by-laws respecting the economic, social and environmental well-being of the municipality;
the health, safety and well-being of persons; the protection of persons and property; and animals;
AND WHEREAS section 128 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to prohibit and
regulate with respect to public nuisances, including matters that, in the opinion of the Council of the City of
Hamilton are or could become public nuisances;
AND WHEREAS in the opinion of the Council of the City of Hamilton certain kinds of noise are or could
become a public nuisance;
AND WHEREAS section 129 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to prohibit and
regulate with respect to noise and, in particular, to prohibit noise unless a permit is obtained from the City of
Hamilton and to impose conditions for obtaining, continuing to hold and renewing the permit, including
requiring the submission of plans;
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001 authorizes the City of Hamilton to pass by-laws
providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of Hamilton passed under that Act is guilty of
an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001 further authorizes the City of Hamilton, amongst other things, to
delegate its authority,. to impose fees or charges on persons for services or activities provided or done by or
on behalf of it, to provide for inspections and inspection orders, and to make orders to discontinue activity or
to do work;
NOW THEREFORE, the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
SHORT TITLE
1. This By-law may be referred to as the "Noise Control By-law" or the "Hamilton Noise
Control By-law".
APPLICATION OF BY-LAW (21-199)
1a. This By-law does not apply with respect to noise made in connection with the delivery of goods to any
of the following, except as otherwise authorized by regulation under the Municipal Act, 2001:
(a) Retail business establishments;
(b) Restaurants, including cafes and bars;
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 3 of 12
(c) Hotels and motels; and,
(d) Goods distribution facilities.
[As Amended: By-law 21-199 s. 2]
DEFINITIONS
2. In this By-law:
"animal" means any member of the animal kingdom, other than a human;
"authorized vehicle" means a vehicle operated by or on behalf of a government, government
agency or utility including but not limited to a vehicle operated by the Hamilton Police Service, the
City's Emergency Services or Public Works Departments, or the Hamilton Street Railway;
"City" means the municipality of the City of Hamilton or the geographic area of the City of
Hamilton as the context requires;
"construction" means activity necessary or incidental to erecting, demolishing, assembling,
altering, installing, repairing or equipping a structure of any kind, a road or a utility including
clearing, grading, excavating or filling any land;
"Council" means Council of the City of Hamilton;
"Director" means the City's Director of Parking and By-law Services and his or her designate or
successor;
"farm" means an agricultural operation as defined in the Farming and Food Production Protection
Act, 1998 and includes such an operation that is not carried on with the expectation of gain but
otherwise meets the definition in that Act;
"loading" means loading, unloading, delivering, picking up, packing, unpacking or otherwise
handling any containers, produce, materials or waste;
"normal farm practices" means normal farm practices as defined in the Farming and
Food Production Protection Act, 1998;
"occupant" means a person over the age of 18 in possession of a property;
"officer" means a person appointed by the City of Hamilton or assigned by the Director to
enforce this By-law;
"owner" includes each owner or occupant of a property;
"point of reception" means any point on a property where noise originating from other than that
property is received;
"property" means land including a building or structure, or part of a building or structure;
"Special Event" means a Special Event as defined in the City's Special Events Policies and
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 4 of 12
Procedures Manual and that is recognized by the City as a special event; and
- .
"vehicle" includes but is not limited to a motor vehicle and any attachment to a vehicle such as
a trailer.
QUALITATIVE NOISE
PROHIBITIONS
3.(1) No person shall make or permit to be made:
(a) an unreasonable noise; or
(b) a noise that is likely to disturb the inhabitants of the City.
(2) Without limiting the generality of section 3, noise from the sources listed in paragraphs
3(2)(a) to 3(2)(h) is deemed to be an unreasonable noise or a noise that is likely to disturb
the inhabitants of the City:
(a) a bell, horn, siren or other warning device, including but not limited to a vehicle's
bell, horn, siren or other warning device when unnecessary or for an unreasonable
period of time except when permitted by statute, regulation or by-law;
(b) a condition of disrepair or maladjustment, including but not limited to the
maladjustment of any load, of any vehicle or a part or accessory of any vehicle;
(c) a radio, amplifier, speaker or other similar device on or in a vehicle that is clearly
audible at least 8 m from the vehicle;
(d) a radio, amplifier, speaker or other similar device that is:
(i) projected into a public place for the purpose of advertising a good or
service; or
(ii) clearly audible at a point of reception;
(e) a discharge of the exhaust of any steam engine, internal combustion engine or
pneumatic device except with an exhaust or intake muffling device in good working
order and in constant operation that prevents unreasonable noise;
(f) a combustion or electric engine, including but not limited to a model airplane or all-
terrain vehicle engine, that is:
(i) used for recreational purposes;
(ii) used between 10 p.m. of one day and 7 a.m. of the next day or used for
more than 1 hour in total between 7 a.m. and 10 p.m. of one day; and
(iii) clearly audible at a point of reception;
(g) an animal under the care, control or ownership of an individual that is:
(i) persistent; and .
(ii) clearly audible at a point of
reception, except such noise from an animal
on a farm; or
(h) construction or loading that is clearly audible at a point of reception between
10 p.m. of one day and 7 a.m. of the next day.
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 5 of 12
QUANTITATIVE NOISE
PROHIBITION
4. No person shall make or permit to be made noise that contravenes:
(a) an applicable Noise Pollution Control Publication of Ontario's Ministry of the
Environment; or
(b) a permission, such as an environmental compliance approval, under federal or
provincial legislation
[As Amended: By-law 14-320, s. 2]
EXEMPTIONS
NOT REQUIRING A PERMIT
5. Despite any other provision of this By-law, this By-law shall not apply to noise from:
(a) an activity carried on at Tim Horton’s Field;
[As Amended, By-law 14-321, s. 1]
(b) an activity carried on in accordance with a Special Event permit issued by the City
or as otherwise authorized in advance by the City provided that:
(i) if required by the Director, a qualified individual or qualified individuals, as
determined by the Director, monitor the noise and file a report with Director
at the expense of the holder of the activity;
(ii) any noise does not begin before 11 a.m. and ends before 12 midnight of
one day;
(iii) any noise does not exceed 90 dBA as measured 10 m from its source;
(iv) any noise does not exceed 60 dBA at a point of reception;
(v) in the event of a conflict between paragraphs 5(b)(i), (ii), (iii) or (iv) and a
condition imposed under a Special Event permit or other authorization, the
condition imposed under the Special Event permit or other authorization
shall prevail;
(c) a filming event carried on in accordance with a film permit issued under the
Hamilton Film Permit By-law;
(d) construction or loading between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. of one day;
(e) the operation of an authorized vehicle;
(f) an emergency measure undertaken:
(i) to preserve the health or safety of an individual;
(ii) to protect property; or
(iii) by or on behalf of the City;
(g) the operation of a bell, tone, whistle or other similar device used as a traffic control
device; or
(h) normal farm practices;
(i) an activity carried out in compliance with a permission, such as an environmental compliance
approval, under federal or provincial legislation.
[As Amended, By-law 14-320, s.3]
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 6 of 12
REQUIRING A PERMIT
6.(1) Any person may apply for an exemption permit from this By-law or any provision of it.
While all applications will be considered, an exemption permit is intended to permit, with appropriate
conditions imposed, noise from a short term event on private property, noise from construction or
noise from entertainment on a commercial outdoor patio
[As Amended, By-law 17-068 s.1]
(2) An application for an exemption permit shall be made at least 60 days in advance
and shall be accompanied by the applicable fee.
(3) Despite subsection 6(2), an application for an exemption permit may be made less than 60
days in advance if it is accompanied by the applicable fee.
(3A) Without limiting the Director’s authority to prescribe the form and content of an application
for an exemption permit as set out in section 7(b), an application for an exemption permit
for entertainment on a commercial outdoor patio shall include:
(b) a Certificate of Compliance with respect to the sound level at the property line
completed by a certified acoustical consultant or engineer;
(c) a Site Plan showing:
(i) the surrounding residential areas, properties and dwelling units;
(ii) a premises plan (detailed floor plan);
(iii) the position/distance of hospitals, schools, seniors care
facilities/residences, places of public worship; and
(d) certification that a placard has been posted in a location where members of the
public can easily read it from the outside of the premises for 30 days or more as
required by the Director. The placard will include:
(i) date and times to be set out in the permit;
(ii) form of music and sound equipment to be used;
(iii) sound level limits – maximum (Leq) 60 dBA measured at property line;
(iv) where and how to file a comment; and
(v) contact information
[As Amended, By-law 17-068 s.2]
(4) Upon receipt of a completed application for an exemption permit, the Director may:
(b) issue the exemption permit subject to such conditions as he or she may
determine; or
(c) refuse the exemption permit.
An application for an exemption permit for noise from an activity that is prohibited under a zoning by-
law will be refused. For example, an application for noise from entertainment on a commercial outdoor
patio where entertainment is prohibited under a zoning by-law will be refused.
[As Amended, By-law 17-068 s.3]
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 7 of 12
(5) In considering an application for an exemption permit, the Director shall have regard to:
(b) any negative effects the issuance of the exemption permit may have on
neighbouring properties or on the City;
(c) any benefits the issuance of the exemption permit may have on neighbouring
properties or on the City;
(d) any previous violations of this By-law or an exemption permit by the applicant; and
(e) anything the Director considers relevant.
(6) The conditions that the Director may impose on an exemption permit include but are not
limited to:
(a) the type and volume of the noise that may be made;
(b) the times during which noise may be made;
(c) the period of time during which the exemption permit is in effect;
(d) that a qualified individual or qualified individuals, as determined by the Director,
monitor the noise and file a report with Director at the applicant's expense.
(e) An applicant for an exemption permit may appeal the decision of the Director to the
Planning Committee within 10 days of the Director’s decision being made.
(f) Upon receipt of a completed appeal, the Director shall notify the applicant once an
appeal date before the Planning Committee has been set and if the applicant does
not attend on the appeal date, the Committee may proceed in their absence and the
applicant shall not be entitled to further notice in the proceeding.
(g) Council may uphold or vary the recommendation or recommendations of the
Planning Committee or do any act or make any decision it might have done had it
conducted the appeal itself and the applicant shall not be entitled to a further
hearing of the appeal before Council. The decision of Council shall be final.
(h) An exemption permit issued under this section expires upon a breach of any of its
conditions.
(6A) The conditions that the Director shall impose on an exemption permit for entertainment on
a commercial outdoor patio are that:
(a) the noise have a maximum equivalent sound level (Leq) of 60 dBA measured at
the property line;
(b) the noise be made only on Thursdays, Fridays and Saturdays from 11 am to 11
pm;
(c) the sound equipment, if any;
(i) be only the sound equipment approved under the exemption permit;
(ii) be placed and used in accordance with the Floor Plan and Certificate of
Compliance approved under the exemption permit;
(d) The operator of the food premises where the commercial outdoor patio is located
otherwise comply with applicable City by-laws and other law.
[As Amended, By-law 17-068 s.4]
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 8 of 12
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
General
7.(1) The Director is authorized to administer and enforce this By-law including but not
limited to:
(a) arranging for:
i. the assistance or work of City staff, City agents or the assistance of police
officers;
ii. the making of orders or other requirements and the imposition of conditions
as authorized under this By-law;
iii. the obtaining of court orders or warrants as may be required;
iv. the commencement of such actions on behalf of the City to recover costs or
restrain contravention of this By-law as deemed necessary;
(b) prescribing the format and content of any forms or other documents required
under this By-law.
(2) The Director may assign officers to enforce this By-law and officers so assigned or
appointed by Council to enforce this By-law shall have the authority to:
(a) carry out inspections;
(b) make orders or other requirements as authorized under this By-law;
(c) give immediate effect to any orders or other requirements made under this By-Law
(3) The Director may assign duties or delegate tasks under this By-law to be carried out in
the Director's absence or otherwise.
(4) Fees under this By-law, including fees for services provided, shall be as set and
approved by Council from time to time.
Entry and Inspections
(5) The Director or an officer may enter on land at any reasonable time and in accordance
with the conditions set out in sections 435 and 437 of the Municipal Act, 2001 for the
purpose of carrying out an inspection to determine whether or not the following are
being complied with:
(a) this By-law;
(b) an order or other requirement made under this By-law;
(c) a condition of an exception permit issued under this By-law; or
(d) an order made under section 431 of the Municipal Act, 2001.
(6) The Director or an officer, for the purposes of the inspection under subsection 7(5) and
in accordance with the conditions set out in section 436 of the Municipal Act, 2001,
may:
(a) require the production for inspection of documents or things relevant to the
inspection;
(b) inspect and remove documents or things relevant to the inspection for the purpose
of making copies or extracts;
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 9 of 12
(c) require information in writing or otherwise as required by the Director or an officer
from any person concerning a matter related to the inspection; or
(d) alone or in conjunction with a person possessing special or expert knowledge, make
examinations or take tests, samples or photographs necessary for the purposes of the
inspection.
(7) The Director may require the person responsible to pay any costs incurred by the City in
exercising its authority to inspect under subsection 7(6), including but not limited to the
cost of any examination, test, sample or photograph necessary for the purposes of the
inspection.
(8) The Director or an officer may undertake an inspection pursuant to an order issued by a
provincial judge or justice of the peace under section 438 of the Municipal Act, 2001, in
accordance with the conditions set out in that section, where he or she has been
prevented or is likely to be prevented from carrying out an inspection under subsections
7(5) or 7(6).·
Orders and other Documents including Delivery
(9) If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may
make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the
contravention occurred to discontinue the contravening activity.
(10) An order under subsection 7(9) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention
and the location of the property on which the contravention occurred; and
(b) the date or dates by which there must be compliance with the order.
(11) If an officer is satisfied that a contravention of this By-law has occurred, he or she may
make an order requiring the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or
permitted the contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the
contravention occurred to do work to correct the contravention.
(12) An order under subsection 7(10) shall set out:
(a) reasonable particulars of the contravention adequate to identify the contravention
and the location of the property on which the contravention occurred;
(b) the work to be completed;
(c) the date or dates by which the work must be completed; and
(d) notice that if the order is not complied with, then the work may be done at the
expense of the person who contravened the By-law or who caused or permitted the
contravention or the owner or occupier of the property on which the contravention
occurred.
(13) Delivery of an order to discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection 7(9) or an
order to do work made under subsection 7(11) or of any other document under this By-law
may be given personally or by registered mail to the last known address of:
(a) in the case of an order to discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection
7(9) or an order to do work made under subsection 7(11), the person who contravened
the By-law, or the owner or occupier of the property where a contravention occurred;
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 10 of 12
and
(b) such other persons affected by the order or other document as an officer
determines. Delivery by registered mail shall be deemed to have taken place five
business days after the date of mailing.·
(14) In the case of an order to discontinue a contravening activity made under subsection 7(9)
or an order to do work made under subsection 7(11), in addition to delivery given in
accordance with subsection 7(13), delivery may be given by an officer placing a placard
containing the order or other document in a conspicuous place on the property where the
contravention occurred.
(15) Where delivery cannot be given in accordance with subsection 7(13), sufficient delivery is
deemed to have taken place when given in accordance with subsection 7(14).
(16) Where a time frame is set out in an order or other document for carrying out any action,
an officer may extend the time for compliance beyond the established time frame
provided such extension is required and is acceptable to the officer.
City carrying out Work
(17) Where a person does not comply with a direction or a requirement, including an order,
under this By-law to do a matter or thing, the Director, with such assistance by others as
may be required, may carry out such direction, requirement or order at the person's
expense.
(18) Where the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection 7(17) are estimated to be:
(a) $20,000 or less, the Director may proceed without further approval and in
accordance with the City's Purchasing Policy; or
(b) more than $20,000, the Director may proceed with approval of an authorized
person or of Council and in accordance with the City's Purchasing Policy.
(19) The City may recover the costs of doing a matter or thing under subsection 7(17) by
action or by adding the costs to the tax roll and collecting them in the same manner
as property taxes and such costs shall include an annual interest rate of 15 per cent
commencing on the day the City incurs the costs and ending on the day the costs,
including the interest, are paid in full.
(20) The amount of the City's costs, including interest to the date payment is made in full,
constitutes a lien upon the land, upon the registration of a notice of lien upon the land.
Penalties
· (21) Every person other than a corporation who fails to comply with any provision of this
By- law or an order or other direction made under this By-law is guilty of an offence
and, upon
conviction, is liable to a fine of not more than $10,000.00 for a first offence and $25,000 for a
second or subsequent offence.
(22) Every corporation that fails to comply with any provision of this By-law or an order or other
direction made under this By-law is guilty of an offence and, upon conviction, is liable to a
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 11 of 12
fine of not more than $50,000 for a first offence and not more than $100,000 for a second
or subsequent offence.
(23) Where a person has been convicted of an offence under this By-law, the court in which
the conviction has been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in
addition to any other remedy and to any penalty imposed by this By-law, make an order
prohibiting the continuation or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
TRANSITION, REPEAL, COMING INTO FORCE, ETC.
8.(1) All measurements in this By-law are given in the metric short form.
(2) If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any provision or part of a provision of this
By- law invalid, the provision or part of a provision is deemed severable from this By-
law and it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to
be in force.
(3) All prosecutions and other enforcement processes commenced under By-law No. 03-
020 which have not been completed on the day this By-law comes into force shall be
completed under By-law No. 03-020 as if it had not be repealed.
(4) By-law No. 03-020 is repealed as of the day this By-law comes into force.
(5) This By-law comes into force on the day of its passing.
PASSED this 27th day of October, 2021.
________________________ ________________________
F. Eisenberger A. Holland
Mayor Acting City Clerk
BY-LAW NO. 11-285 (Amended October, 2021) NOISE CONTROL BY-LAW Page 12 of 12



Content from 11306 to amend bylaw no 10260 a bylaw to regulate vacant buildingspdf:
Authority: Item 11, Planning Committee
Report: 11-022 (PED09031(d))
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 306
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-306
To Amend By-law No. 10-260, a By-law to Regulate Vacant Buildings
WHEREAS Council of the City of Hamilton enacted a by-law to regulate vacant
buildings, being City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-260;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for an amendment to City of Hamilton By-law No.
10-260 to require that signs providing the property owners' emergency contact
information be displayed on vacant buildings;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Section 2 of By-law No. 10-260 is amended to add the following new definition
,
after the definition of "property" and to move the "and" at the end of the definition
of "property" to end of the new definition accordingly:
"street" means any public highway but does not include a provincial
highway;
Section 9 of By-law No. 10-260 is amended by adding the following new
,
subsection 9(c) and relettering the subsequent subsections accordingly:
(c) post at least one sign on the vacant building, except a vacant
building containing 1,2 or 3 dwelling units, that:
To Amend By-law No. 10-260, a By-law to Regulate Vacant Buildings
Page 2 of 2
(i) bears the words "for information or inquiries" and the
information of the owner, including a name and telephone
number, in black letters on a white retro-reflective
background as illustrated in the following figure:
FOR INFORMATION OR INQUIRIES
CONTACT :
NAME:
TELEPHONE NUMBER:
(ii) is readable from each adjacent street;
3. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2011.
R. R.
Mayor



Content from 11312 to amend the sanitary surcharge and wastewater abatement bylaw no 03272 and implement the 2012:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-035 (FCS11100/PW11086)
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 312
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-312
To Amend The Sanitary Surcharge and Wastewater
Abatement By-law No. 03-272 and Implement the 2012
Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on September 24, 2003, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 03-272, known and referred to as “The Sanitary
Surcharge and Wastewater Abatement By-law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c. 25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2011 the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-035 and
did authorize the 2012 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2012 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Section 20 of By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the
following:
20. That the Abatement for authorized Consumers be 100% of the
maximum permitted Abatement and as more particularly set out in
Schedule “B” to this By-law. The City reserves the right to
discontinue or continue the wastewater abatement program and
associated Abatement at any time and for any reason whatsoever.
2
Schedule "B" to By-law No. 03-272 is deleted and replaced with the new
,
Schedule "B" attached to this by-law.
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
,
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2012 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2012.
,
5. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 03-272 are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2011.
\
R.
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE “B”
Wastewater Abatement Program
1. (a) Initial Application Processing Fee $119.65 plus applicable
(Section 10) taxes
(b) Supplementary Application Fee $358.76 plus applicable
(Section 11) taxes and full cost
recovery for peer review
(c) Annual Administration Fee (where $478.40 plus applicable
annual Abatement exceeds $500.00 taxes
-sub-section 22(b))
2. In determining whether a Consumer appears to qualify for an Abatement
under section 10 of this By-law, the Abatement shall be calculated in
accordance with the following formula, based on data from the calendar
year prior to the year of application for the Abatement:
A = annual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property from all
sources
B = annual wastewater diverted from the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (if B is less than 25% of A, the Consumer
is not eligible for the Abatement; if B is greater than 75% of A,
insert a value equal to 75% of A)
C = annual wastewater discharged to the City’s sanitary sewer and
combined sewer system (C = A – B)
D = infiltration and inflow add back (D = C x 133%: add back adjustment
of 33% to the volumetric charge so that all ratepayers continue to
pay an equal portion of the treatment costs associated with inflow
and infiltration)
E% = wastewater Abatement in percentage
Step 1: A – B = C
Step 2: D = C x 133%
Step 3: E% = (A – D) x 100
A
3. If an Abatement is authorized for a Consumer in accordance with this By-
law, the Abatement will be applied quarterly each year in accordance with
the following formula:
F = actual volume (m3) of water supplied to the property by the City
during the previous quarter
4
G = volume (m3) of water eligible for the Abatement during the previous
quarter
H= Sanitary Surcharge (for 2012 is $1.174 per cubic meter of water)
$I = dollar amount of Abatement for the billing period
Step 4: F x E% = H
Step 5: G x H = $I



Content from 11313 to amend the sewer and drain bylaw no 06026pdf:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-035 (FCS11100/PW11086)
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 313
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-313
To Amend The Sewer and Drain By-law No. 06-026,
and Implement the 2012 Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on February 15, 2006, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed
and enacted By-law No. 06-026, which by-law came into force and effect on
March 1, 2006 and may be known and referred to as “The Sewer and Drain By-
law”;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality’s property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-035 and
did authorize the 2012 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2012 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton’s Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. Schedule “A” to By-law No. 06-026 is deleted and replaced with the new
Schedule “A” attached to this by-law.
2. The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2012 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2012.
.
4. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 06-026 are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2011.
R,
Mayor
3
SCHEDULE “A”
SCHEDULE OF FEES AND CHARGES
Effective January 1, 2012
1. Basic Fee for any sewer permit $59.80
In addition to the basic fee described
in section (1) of this Schedule "A", the following
fees are payable:
(a) for a Sanitary Sewer Lateral – Private Portion and
a Sanitary Sewer Lateral – Public portion, or for
either one individually $25.10
(b) for a Storm Sewer Lateral – Private Portion and a
Storm Sewer Lateral – Public Portion, or for
either one individually $25.10
(c) for a Branch Connection to a
Sewer Lateral – Private Portion $25.10
(d) for a Catchbasin including
connection to a Storm
Sewer Lateral – Private Portion $25.10
(e) inspect Storm Sewer $25.10
(f) inspect Sanitary Sewer $25.10
2. Sanitary Sewer Lateral – Private Portion and
Sanitary Sewer Lateral – Public Portion
Inspection (weekend) $251.20
3. Expired Sewer Permit Extension (Renewal) $37.60
(plus any difference in price between new permit and expired permit)
4. Service Charge for Missed Appointments $112.10
and Inspections Not Ready.
5. (a) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning – Regular Hours $435.80
(b) Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning – After Hours $527.50
4
(c) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation – Regular Hours $530.40
(d) Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation – After Hours $630.70
(e) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation- Regular Hours $435.80
(f) Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation – After Hours $516.00
Notes to Schedule “A”:
1. All fees and charges in this schedule are subject to all applicable taxes.
2. “Regular Hours” means 7 a.m. – 4:30 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
3. “After Hours” means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday,
Sunday, public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized
or required by law to be closed.
4. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning” means services to relieve blockage(s) in the
Sewer Lateral in order to temporarily reinstate sewer service.
5. “Partial Sewer Lateral Cleaning – Locate” means services to locate any
Defects in the Sewer Lateral without closed circuit television inspection.
6. “Complete Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services to complete a
thorough cleaning and closed circuit television inspection of the Sewer Lateral.
7. “Abandoned Sewer Lateral Investigation” means services related to an
unsuccessful attempt to access the Sewer Lateral for cleaning.



Content from 11314 to amend the sewer use bylaw no 04150pdf:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-035 (FCS11100/PW11086)
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 314
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-314
To Amend the Sewer Use By-law No. 04-150
and Implement the 2012 Sewer Use Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on June 30, 2004, the Council of the City of Hamilton passed and
enacted By-law No. 04-150, known and referred to as the "Sewer Use By-law",
which By-law came into force and effect on June 30, 2004;
AND WHEREAS pursuanl to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-035 and
did authorize the 2012 water and wastewater fees and charges, including the
sewer use fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2012 sewer use fees and charges set out herein
has been given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public
Notice Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Schedule "D" to By-law No. 04-150 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "D" attached to this by-law.
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
.
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2012 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
3. This by-law comes into force on January 1,2012.
p
2
In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. 04-150 are hereby
.
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2011.
O
R. Bratinÿi R. C
Mayor
SCHEDULE D
SCHEDULE OF FEES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
1. Annual permit to discharge hauled sewage $283.31"
2. (a) Discharge fees for hauled sewage generated inside the City of
Hamilton:
Fee for Fee for
discharge: discharge: non-
Volume of Hauled Sewage Vehicle compliant* compliant*
Up to 1000 imperial Up to 4.54 m3 or
gallons or any part any part thereof $ 42.64 $42.64
thereof
Greater than 1000 Greater than 4.54
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 42.64 $85.27
less than or equal to or equal to 15.9
3500 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 3500 Greater than 15.9
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $ 85.27 $127.92
less than or equal to or equal to 22.7
5000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 5000 Greater than 22.7
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $127.92 $213.17
less than or equal to or equal to 36.3
8000 imperial m3
gallons
Greater than 8000 Greater than 36.3
imperial gallons but m3 but less than $170.55 $255.80
less than or equal to or equal to 45.43
10000 imperial m3
gallons
*plus applicable taxes
b) Holding tanks of recreational vehicles $ 5.60*
3. Overstrength Discharge Fees:
Parameter Fee (cents/kg)*
B,O,D. $0.6802
Suspended Solids $0.5440
Solvent Extractable Matter $0.5713
Kjeldahl Nitrogen $2.0711
phosphorus $1.4569
4. Administrative Fees for Sewer Use Agreements (charges per quarter):
a) Overstrength Discharge Agreement $279.41"
b) Sanitary Sewer Surcharge Agreement $279.41"
c) Chloride Discharge Agreement $279.41"
Spills Response Fee (per hour) $ 60.42*
.
6. Information Request Fee $128.54"
7. Wastewater Sampling Fees:
(a) Wastewater Sampling Vehicle Fee (per hour) $ 5.73*
(b) Wastewater Sampling Equipment Fee (per day) $ 15.64"
(c) Wastewater Sampling Technician Fee (per hour) $ 40.44*
*plus applicable taxes



Content from 11315 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 3, General Issues Committee
Report 11-035 (FCS11100/PW11086)
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 315
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 11-315
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026
and Implement the 2012 Water Fees and Charges
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law No. R84-026, being a
by-law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system
of The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of
water rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 3 of General Issues Committee Report 11-035 and
did authorize the 2012 water and wastewater fees and charges, including but not
limited to the fees and charges set out herein;
AND WHEREAS notice of the 2012 fees and charges set out herein has been
given in accordance with the provisions of the City of Hamilton's Public Notice
Policy By-law No. 07-351.
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Subsection 12(2) of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the
.
following:
(2) Except as otherwise provided in sub-section (5) of this section, and
except for water for fire protection purposes for which no water rate is
payable, the Owners and Occupants of all lands having a water
service connected to a City of Hamilton watermain are liable to pay
meter rates as set out in Schedule "G" to this By-law. Further, such
Owners and Occupants are liable to pay the minimum charge portion
of the metered water rates set out in Part A (Minimum Charge) of
Schedule "G" to this By-law, whether or not the water meter is
removed or the water service is shut off at the street line.
Subsections 12(3) and (4) of By-law No. R84-026 are deleted and the
,
word "deleted" in square brackets shall be inserted beside each
subsection number. The numbering of the remaining subsections of
section 12 shall remain unchanged.
Clause 12(7)(b)(iii) of By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the
.
following:
(iii) the metered water rate set out in Part B (Consumption Charge) of
Schedule "G" to this By-law, except that the sanitary sewer surcharge
will not be applied to those properties where a separate water service
connection is established for a Private Water Filling Station provided
that the separate water service connection is not used to provide
water for any domestic purpose.
Schedule "A" to By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "A" attached to this by-law.
Schedule "C" to By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "C" attached to this by-law.
Schedule "E" to By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "E" attached to this by-law.
Schedule "G" to By-law No. R84-026 is deleted and replaced with the new
.
Schedule "G" attached to this by-law.
The fees and charges imposed by this by-law continue in force until
.
amended, repealed or replaced (by by-law or by a resolution of the
Council of the City of Hamilton confirmed by by-law) and for greater
certainty this includes continuing in force after December 31, 2012 until
amended, repealed or replaced.
This by-law comes into force on January 1, 2012.
°
10. In all other respects, the contents of By-law No. R84-026 are hereby
confirmed as unchanged.
PASSED this 14th day of December, 2011.
R. 13ratina R. Ca
Mayor
SCHEDULE "A"
NON-METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
Water: City of Hamilton
$428.53 per annum, plus applicable taxes.
Note: Sanitary Surcharge is 100% of non-metered water rate for a
combined total non-metered annual water and wastewater rate of
$857.06 per annum, plus applicable taxes.
SCHEDULE "C"
MISCELLANEOUS RATES FOR WATER
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
(Referred to in sub-sections 12(6), (7) and (8))
Travellin.q Shows and Other Temporary Occasions
,
The deposit required from travelling shows or applicants for other temporary
occasions is Five Thousand, Eight Hundred and Seventy-Six and 50/100
Dollars ($5,876.50), and consists of:
(a) Two Hundred and Eighty Dollars ($280.00) as a usage deposit (to be
applied to the cost of temporary connection/disconnection, the per
diem rental cost for the hydrant adapter and the amount due for water
used); and
(b) Five Thousand, Five Hundred and Ninety-Six and 50/100 Dollars
($5,596.50) as a damage deposit (refundable upon return to the City
of the hydrant adapter, less any damages incurred).
The fee for connecting and disconnecting the water service and for the
hydrant adapter rental are set forth in Section 9 of Schedule "E" to this By-
law and are in addition to the applicable metered water rate set out in
Schedule "G" to this By-law.
Public Water Fillin.q Stations
.
(a) The rate payable for water supplied to tank trucks at the Public Water
Filling Stations be $1.761 per cubic metre or part thereof. The Public
Water Filling Stations are located at:
(i) Cormorant Road, Ancaster
(ii)
Dartnall Road, Hamilton.
(b) Water Haulage License Fee (includes 2 cards) $190.60
Private Water Fillinq Stations
.
The one time permit fee for new Private Water Filling Stations approved by
the General Manager of Public Works is $1,121.10 and is payable upon
permit application.
6
The annual permit fee for both existing Private Water Filling Stations and
new Private Water Filling Stations approved by the General Manager of
Public Works is $336.20 and is payable within one month of the notification
by the City.
4. Areas Outside the City of Hamilton
The rate for water supplied to municipalities for the Owner or Occupant of
any lands outside the City of Hamilton is the applicable meter rate set forth in
Schedule "G" to this By-law, plus fifty per cent (50%) surcharge or such other
surcharge as may be specifically defined in the agreement between the City
and the municipality, Owner or Occupant of the lands outside the City of
Hamilton.
7
SCHEDULE "E"
TABLE OF FEES FOR VARIOUS SERVICES*
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
(a) Water Service Permit Fees $80.60
.
(b) Permit fees associated with the installation of water services, supply
and installation of water meter and remote reading device, and
superintending, as referred to in clause 4(1)(b) of By-law R84-026, as
amended:
Size of Water Meter Fee
16 mm diameter $ 351.60
20 mm diameter $ 395.50
25 mm diameter $ 546.80
38 mm diameter $ 817.60
50 mm diameter $ 979.10
50 mm diameter (compound with strainer) $ 3,241.80
100 mm diameter (turbine with strainer) $ 3,058.80
100 mm diameter (compound with strainer) $ 4,770.70
100 mm diameter (fire service compound) $ 4,947.50
150 mm diameter (turbine with strainer) $ 5,278.60
150 mm diameter (compound with strainer) $ 9,426.90
150 mm diameter (fire service turbine) $ 5,437.00
150 mm diameter (fire service compound) $10,240.40
200 mm diameter (fire service turbine) $ 9,451.50
200 mm diameter (fire service compound) $14,011.60
250 mm diameter (fire service compound) $19,925.90
Other sizes and types Cost + 10%
Overhead
2. • Water Meter Removal Fee Cost + 10% Overhead
For superintending the laying of a new water service
.
(a) Regular Inspection - Regular Hours $69.40
(b) Complex or Development Inspection. This fee is in addition to $69.40
the Regular Inspection Fee and is charged per service from the main
meter of the development to each unit being served.
(c) Regular Inspection -After Hours $106.50
4ÿ Existing Water Service Replacement or Repair Fee (not including new water
meter, if required):
(a) service replacement of public portion from < 20 mm to
and including 20mm diameter plus inspection of private portion $297.20
(b) inspection of service replacement of private portion from < 20 mm
to and including 20mm $224.20
(c) service size upgrade additional fee (based on size and length)
Upgrade From: Short Side Long Side
20 mm to 25 mm $ 27.50 $ 51.60
20 mm to 40 mm $119.30 $220.10
20 mm to 50 mm $294.70 $547.00
25 mm to 40 mm $ 90.50 $168.50
25 mm to 50 mm $267.20 $495.40
40 mm to 50 mm $176.60 $326.80
(a) For turning water off (Regular Hours) $69.40
.
(b) For turning water off (After Hours) $106.50
(a) For turning water on (Regular Hours) $69.40
.
(b) For turning water on (After Hours) $106.50
(a) For turning water off & on during the same call (Regular Hours) $104.20
,
(b) For turning water off & on during the same call (After Hours) $158.40
Flow test for fire-fighting design purposes (hydrant flow test) $100.90
.
9. For temporary connections and disconnections (hydrant adapter fees):**
Usage cost (metered water rate) plus connection/disconnection fee
(a) Connection/Disconnection Fee - Regular Hours $196.20/visit
(b) Connection/Disconnection Fee- After Hours $296.40/visit
(c) Hydrant adapter rental (first 7 days) $76.70/day
(d) Per diem charge for hydrant adapter rental (after first
7 days) $5.60/day
10. Replacement Cost for Lost or Broken Meter and Attachments:
Size of Meter Cost
16 mm diameter $ 188.00
20 mm diameter $ 278.50
25 mm diameter $ 345.40
38 mm diameter $ 770.10
50 mm diameter $ 883.50
50 mm diameter (compound) $3,706.80
100 mm diameter (turbine) $3,190.70
100 mm diameter (compound) $ 5,155.00
100 mm diameter (fire service $ 8,084.00
compound)
150 mm diameter (turbine) $ 5,871.40
150 mm diameter (compound) $ 8,934.30
150 mm diameter (fire service $ 8,376.30
turbine)
150 mm diameter (fire service $12,934.40
compound)
200 mm diameter (fire service $11,306.40
turbine)
200 mm diameter (fire service $17,785.90
compound)
250 mm diameter (fire service $25,126.90
compound)
>250 mm diameter (all types) cost + 10%
overhead
10
11. Testing water meters, referred to in Section 9 of this By-law
16 mm to 25 mm diameter $130.30
38 mm to 50 mm diameter $192.60
100 mm plus diameter Cost + 10%
overhead
In situ testing of water meters (all sizes) Cost +10%
overhead
12. For service calls other than previously specified:
(a) Service Call- Regular Hours $69.40
(b) Service Call- After Hours $106.50
13. Repair or Replace City Property cost plus 33%
(Labour Materials and Equipment Costs) overhead
Watermain Valve Shut Down and Recharge cost plus 33%
overhead
General Administration Fees:
Extra or lost card replacement for water filling stations $44.90
Account Review $98.80
General Request (per hour) $50.60
NSF Cheque $30.90
Permit Cancellation Administration Fee $27.50
Permit Renewal Fee $38.40
Notes to Schedule "E":
* Plus all applicable taxes.
** This service requires a $5,876.50 deposit ($280.00 usage deposit and
$5,596.50 damage deposit).
"Regular Hours" means 8:30 a.m. - 4:30 p.m. inclusive, Monday to Friday.
"After Hours" means outside Regular Hours Monday to Friday, a Saturday, Sunday,
public holiday or other day on which banks in Ontario are authorized or required by
law to be closed.
1!
SCHEDULE"G"
METERED WATER RATES
EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 2012
(Referred to in subsections 12(2) & 13(2))
A) Minimum Char.qe
The minimum charge per billing period is as follows:
Minimum
Approved Volume/ Approved Minimum
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Rate Bi-Monthly Monthly Rate Volume/Month
15mm $16.86 10 m3 $8.43 5 m3
16 mm $16.86 10 m3 $8.43 5 m3
20 mm $16.86 10 m3 $8.43 5 m3
25 mm $89.08 30 m3 $44.54 15 m3
38 mm $98.96 30 m3 $49.48 15 m3
50 mm $117.70 30 m3 $58.85 15 m3
75 mm $203.90 30 m3 $101.95 15 m3
100 mm $261.16 30 m3 $130.58 15 m3
150 mm $462.12 30 m3 $231.06 15 m3
200 mm $797.94 30 m3 $398.97 15 m3
250 mm $1,228.44 30 m3 $614.22 15 m3
Haldimand/Halton Meter Size
50 mm $176.54 30 m3 $ 88.27 15 m3
100 mm $391.74 30 m3 $195.87 15 m3
150 mm $693.22 30 m3 $346.61 15 m3
200 mm $1,196.90 30 m3 $598.45 15 m3
12
B) Consumption Char qe
The consumption charge for the amount of water used over and above the
minimum volume per bi-monthly billing is as follows:
Minimum Consumption Charge
Meter Size Bi-Monthly Per Cubic Metre
Volume
15 mm - 20 mm 10 mÿ $1.174 > 10 m3
25 mm -250 mm 30 m3 $1.174 > 30 m3
Haldimand, Halton & Water Haulers 30 m3 $1.761 > 30 m3
c)
Sanitary Surcharge is 100% of the metered water rate (minimum charge and
consumption charge) with the exception of Haldimand, Halton and Water
Haulers.



Content from 12021 to amend bylaw no 07170 a bylaw to license and regulate various businessespdf:
Authority: Item 1, Planning Committee
Report: 12-001 (PED10063(0)
CM: January 25, 2012
Bill No. 021
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-021
To Amend By-law No. 07-170, a By-law to License and Regulate Various
Businesses
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to license and regulate various businesses
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the replacement of Schedule 22 and
deletion of Schedules 6, 11 and 14 of City of Hamilton By-law No. 07-170;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Schedule 22 of By-law No. 07-170 is deleted and replaced with the new
,
Schedule 22, entitled "Salvage and Second-Hand Goods, Pawnbroker and
Jewellery and Precious Metals Businesses", attached as Appendix A to this By-
law.
Schedules 6, 11 and 14 of By-law No. 07-170 are deleted.
.
3. Subparagraph 6(1)(e)(i) and section 30 of the General Provisions of By-law
No. 07-170 are amended by deleting the titles "Flea Markets and Antique
Markets", "Pawnbrokers" and "Precious Metals and Jewellery Dealers" and
replacing each of them with "(Reserved)".
Subparagraph 6(1)(e)(i) and section 30 of the General Provisions of By-law
,
No. 07-170 are further amended by deleting the title "Salvage and Second-
Hand Goods Businesses" and replacing it with "Salvage and Second-Hand
Goods, Pawnbroker and Jewellery and Precious Metals Businesses".
Appendix "B" of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is amended by
,
deleting "6 (Flea Markets and Antique Markets)", "11 (Pawnbrokers)" and "14
(Precious Metal and Jewellery Dealers)".
Appendix "B" of the General Provisions of By-law No. 07-170 is further
.
amended by deleting "22 (Salvage and Second-Hand Goods Businesses)"
and replacing it with "22 (Salvage and Second-Hand Goods, Pawnbroker and
Jewellery and Precious Metals Businesses)".
All licences issued under Schedules 11 or 14 which are current and valid on
,
the day this By-law comes into force shall be deemed to:
(a) be current and valid under the amended Schedule 22; and
(b)
be subject to all of the applicable provisions of By-law No. 07-170 and
the amended Schedule 22, including but not limited to expiring and being
renewable as though they had been issued under the amended
Schedule 22.
8. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 25th day of January, 2012.
R. Bratina R. nl
Mayor C-ÿy Clerk
SCHEDULE 22
SALVAGE AND SECOND-HAND GOODS, PAWNBROKER, AND JEWELLERY
AND PRECIOUS METALS BUSINESSES,
DEFINITIONS
1. In this Schedule:
"antiques" means furniture or other goods commonly recognized as collectable
because of their quality, value or age, and reproductions of such goods, but
does not include bicycles, coins, electronic goods, jewellery, musical
instruments, precious gems, precious metals, time pieces or tools;
"bicycle" includes but is not limited to a unicycle or a tricycle;
"electronic goods" includes but is not limited to:
(a) digital/video cameras, computers, facsimile machines, DVD/CD/video
players or recorders, mp3 music players, stereos, televisions;
(b) the components of electronic goods; or
(c) the forms of media played or otherwise used by electronic goods such as
DVDs, CDs or videos;
"jewellery" means articles of personal adornment made in whole or part of
precious gems or precious metals;
"operator" means a person who owns, operates, manages, supervises,
controls or is responsible for a business;
"pawnbroker" means a person who carries on the business of taking by way of
pawn or pledge any article for the repayment of money lent thereon and who is
subject to the Pawnbrokers Act.;
"precious metals" include but are not limited to gold, platinum or silver;
"jewellery and precious metals business" means a business purchasing
jewellery or precious metals for the purpose of smelting the jewellery or
precious metalsl
"purchase", in all its forms, includes but is not limited to taken in exchange,
received on consignment, redeemed on a pawn ticket or otherwise received;
"salvage" means metal scrap, used or wrecked motor vehicles or used or
wrecked motor vehicle parts;
"salvage business" means a business purchasing or selling salvage and
includes but is not limited to a motor vehicle wrecking yard;
"second-hand goods" means second-hand bicycles, coins, electronic goods,
iewellery, precious gems, musical instruments, time pieces or tools;
"second-hand goods business" means a business purchasing or selling
second-hand goods including but not limited to an antique market or a flea
market vendor;
"visual barrier" means a barrier that acts as a screen consisting of:
(a) a wall or a fence;
(b) a continuous planting of suitable and healthy trees or shrubs;
(c) an earth berm; or
(d) any combination of the above; and
"works of art" means paintings, photographs, sculpture and other products of
artisans commonly recognized as collectable because of their quality or value,
but does not include jewellery, precious gems, time pieces or coins.
APPLICATION OF SCHEDULE
2. This Schedule does not apply to:
(a) the business of purchasing or selling antiques or works of art; or
(b) a charitable corporation.
3. With the exception of subsections 5(1), 5(2) and 5(3) and section 9, this
Schedule does not apply to any purchase or sale that is subject to the
Pawnbrokers Act.
4. This By-law does not require recording or reporting the purchase or sale of
used tires or metal scrap, or require the retention of any such goods for any
specified period, but this exception does not extend to a used or wrecked motor
vehicle or a used or wrecked motor vehicle part.
LICENSING
5.(1) No person shall operate a jewellery and precious metals business, pawnbroker
business, salvage business or a second-hand goods business without a
licence.
(2) Every person required to obtain a licence shall obtain a separate licence for
each jewellery and precious metals business, pawnbroker business, salvage
business or second-hand goods business.
(3) In addition to complying with the General Provisions of this By-law, a person
applying for a pawnbroker business licence shall provide security to the
satisfaction of the City Treasurer in accordance with section 6 of the
Pawnbrokers Act.
(4) A licence may be issued to authorize a salvage business licence holder or a
second-hand goods business licence holder to deal in one or more classes of
salvage or second-hand goods and no person shall deal in any class of goods
not authorized under the applicable licence.
RECORDS
6.(1) Every jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage business
operator or second-hand goods business operator shall ensure that, without
delay, at the time when any jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand
goods are purchased by their jewellery and precious metals business, salvage
business or second-hand goods business, a record of the purchase is made
and such record shall include:
(a) the date and time of the purchase;
(b) the price or other consideration given;
(c) the name of the manufacturer or maker, if any;
(d) any identifying number or mark, including but not limited to the VIN
number and licence plate number, if any, of a used or wrecked motor
vehicle;
(e) the name, birth date and address of the person from whom the jewellery,
precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods were purchased; and
(f)
the item or items of identification examined.
(2)
Every jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage business
operator or second-hand goods business operator shall ensure that a record of
purchase under subsection 6(1):
(a) up to and including July 1, 2013, is made by hand or electronically, either
as approved in advance by the Issuer of Licences;
(b) after July 1, 2013, is made electronically, as approved in advance by the
Issuer of Licences;
(c) is easily readable and in English;
(d)
is not altered or deleted once completed;
(e) is protected from loss or destruction; and
(f)
is kept for a minimum of one year.
(3)(a) Every jewellery and precious metal business operator, salvage business
operator or second-hand goods business operator shall deliver to the
Hamilton Police Service, before 2:00 p.m. on any day when the business
is open, a copy of all records, not including the names, birth dates and
addresses of the persons from whom the jewellery, precious metals,
salvage or second-hand goods were purchased, made since the last
record was so delivered.
(b)
No jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage business
operator or second-hand goods business operator shall include the
name, birth date or address of the person from whom the jewellery,
precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods were purchased in a
record delivered to the Hamilton Police Service under paragraph 6(3)(a).
(c) Every jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage
business operator or second-hand goods business operator shall only
deliver the name, birth date and address of the person from whom the
jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods were
purchased to an enforcement agency upon the enforcement agency
making a request in writing and such request shall indicate that it is being
made to aid an investigation undertaken with a view to a law
enforcement proceeding or from which a law enforcement proceeding is .
likely to result.
(4) Every jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage business
operator or second-hand goods business operator who has reasonable cause
to suspect that jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods
offered to them or their employee or agent has been stolen or otherwise
unlawfully obtained shall without delay report the matter to the Hamilton Police
Service.
(5) When a used or wrecked motor vehicle is purchased, every salvage business
operator shall produce, at the request of the Issuer of Licences or an Officer,
the vehicle portion of the permit issued for the motor vehicle or the notice from
the Ministry of Transportation that the motor vehicle has been destroyed.
REGULATIONS
Jewellery and Precious Metals/Salvage/Second-Hand Goods Businesses - No
Purchase
7.(1) No jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage business operator
or second-hand goods business operator shall purchase or shall permit the
purchase of jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods from a
person appearing to be under:
(a) the age of 18 years; or
(b) the influence of alcohol or drugs.
(2) Before jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods are
purchased from a person, every jewellery and precious metals business
operator, salvage business operator or second-hand goods business operator
shall ensure they, their employee or agent examines one or more item of
identification that:
(a) includes the name, birth date, address and photograph of the person;
and
(b) reasonably appears to belong to the person and to have been issued by
a government.
Jewellery and Precious Metals/ Salvage/ Second-Hand Goods Businesses -
Retention Period
8.(1) Every jewellery and precious metals business operator, salvage business
operator or second-hand goods operator shall retain jewellery, precious metals,
salvage and second-hand goods on the premises of their business in an
unchanged condition and, in the case of salvage and second-hand goods,
exposed to public view, for a period of at least 30 days after the day on which
the jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods are purchased.
(2) During the 30 day period under subsection 8(1), no jewellery and precious
metals business operator, salvage business operator or second-hand goods
business operator shall sell or otherwise dispose of or permit the sale or other
disposal of the jewellery, precious metals, salvage or second-hand goods.
Pawnbroker Business - Compliance with Pawnbrokers Act
9. Every pawnbroker business operator shall comply with the Pawnbrokers Act.
Salvage Business- Visual Barrier
10.(1) Every salvage business operator shall install and maintain a visual barrier of not
less than 2 m in height between any outdoor area used for their salvage
business and all adjoining properties including all adjoining road allowance.
(2) Every salvage business operator shall ensure that material related to the use of
a property as a salvage business that is not located indoors is:
(a) enclosed within the visual barrier under subsection 10(1);
(b) located not less than 1 m from the visual barrier under subsection 10(1);
and
(c) where located between 1 m and 5 m from the visual barrier under
subsection 10(1), no higher than the visual barrier.
(3) Every salvage business operator shall ensure that all activity related to the use
of their premises that is not located indoors is enclosed within the visual barrier
under subsection 10(1).
(4) Every salvage business operator shall ensure that any opening in the visual
barrier under subsection 10(1) for ingress or egress is covered by a gate that:
(a) is the same height as the visual barrier;
(b) does not open over a traveled portion of road allowance including a
sidewalk; and
(c) is kept clear of obstructions so that the gate may be opened fully at any
time.
(5) Every salvage business operator shall ensure a visual barrier under subsection
10(1) or an opening in a visual barrier under subsection 10(4) comply with any
other applicable by-law.
(6) Where a zoning by-law, site plan or subdivision agreement entered into under
the Planninq Act requires a visual barrier, the requirement in such zoning by-
law, site plan or subdivision agreement prevails in the event of a conflict with
subsections 10(1)to 10(4), both inclusive.



Content from 12070 to amend bylaw no 10118 a bylaw to regulate exterior property maintenancepdf:
Authority: Item 1, Planning Committee
Report 12-004 (PED10112(a))
CM: March 28, 2012
Bill No. 070
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-070
To Amend By-law No. 10-118, a By-law to Regulate Exterior Property Maintenance
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to regulate exterior property maintenance being
City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-118;
AND WHEREAS Council wishes to amend City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-118 to
provide for the draining of swimming pools, hot tubs, spas, water features or similar
water containers;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. By-law No. 10-118 is amended by adding the following new section after section 7:
SWIMMING POOLSÿ HOT TUBSÿ SPASv WATER FEATUREST RAIN
BARRELS AND SIMILAR WATER CONTAINERS
7.1 Every owner or occupant of property shall ensure that water from a
swimming pool, hot tub, spa, water feature, rain barrel or similar water
container is not drained:
(a) on to an adjacent property;
(b) into a sanitary sewer, a storm sewer or a combined sewer unless the
Sewer Use By-law is complied with.
To Amend By-law No. 10-118, a By-law to Regulate Exterior Property Maintenance
Page 2 of 2
2. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 28th day of March, 2012.
R. Bratina R.
Mayor Citÿj Clerk



Content from 12134 to amend the waterworks bylaw no r84026pdf:
Authority: Item 2, General Issues Committee
Report 11-035 (FCS11099/PWl 1085)
CM: December 14, 2011
Bill No. 134
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-134
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No, R84-026
and Impose Fees or Charges for Private Unmetered Fire Lines
WHEREAS on March 20, 1984, the Council of The Regional Municipality of
Hamilton-Wentworth passed and enacted Regional By-law No. R84-026, being a
by-law respecting the management and maintenance of the waterworks system
of The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth and the establishment of
water rates and charges;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", The Regional Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth was dissolved
on January 1, 2001 and the City of Hamilton stands in the place of The Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth for all purposes;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, S.O. 1999, c. 14,
Schedule "C", every by-law of an old municipality, such as the former Regional
Municipality of Hamilton-Wentworth, that is in force on December 31, 2000 shall
be deemed to be a by-law of the City of Hamilton until it expires or is repealed or
amended to provide otherwise;
AND WHEREAS pursuant to section 391 of the Municipal Act, 2001, S.O. 2001,
c.25, sections 9 and 10 of the said Act authorize a municipality to pass by-laws
imposing fees or charges for services or activities provided or done by or on
behalf of the municipality and for the use of the municipality's property, including
property under its control;
AND WHEREAS on the 14th day of December, 2011, the Council of the City of
Hamilton did approve of Item 2 of General Issues Committee Report 11-035 and
did authorize user fees to come into effect on July 1, 2012 for private unmetered
fire lines;
AND WHEREAS notice of the fees or charges for private unmetered fire lines set
out herein has been given in accordance with the provisions of the City of
Hamilton's Public Notice Policy By-law No. 07-351.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026
and Impose Fees or Charges for Private Unmetered Fire Lines
Page 2 of 4
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
The following definition is added to Section 1 of By-law R84-026, after the
°
definition of "prime user":
"private fire protection system" means any private booster pumps,
sprinkler systems, fire hydrants or other private system with the
designated purpose of fire protection and suppression for a premises and
that relies on water from the City of Hamilton Waterworks system for
supply.
Section 11 of By-law No. R84-026 is repealed and replaced with the
.
following new section 11:
PRIVATE FIRE PROTECTION SYSTEMS
Standard Threads
11. (1) No person shall install or maintain on any private fire
protection system which is connected to, or to be connected
to, the City of Hamilton Waterworks system, any hydrant or
valve which is different from the standard in use in the City of
Hamilton with respect to nozzle or stem threads, nozzle
connection or operating units.
Pressure Pump and Alarm Check Valves Required
(2) No person shall install or maintain an automatic sprinkler
system in direct connection with a service pipe from a City of
Hamilton main, unless there is interposed one alarm check-
valve in each riser, effectual to prevent the escape of water
back into the City of Hamilton main, and also.to activate an
alarm when water flows through the valve from the main.
Check Valve on Every Fire Protection System
(3) No person shall install or maintain any private fire protection
system unless the same is equipped with a suitable check
valve effectual to prevent the escape of water back into the
City of Hamilton main or unless otherwise approved by the
General Manager of Public Works.
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026
and Impose Fees or Charges for Private Unmetered Fire Lines
Page 3 of 4
Unmetered Private Fire Lines
(4) The monthly fees or charges set out in Schedule "H'" to this
By-law (private unmetered fire line fees) shall be imposed on
the Owners or Occupants of all lands having a permanent
unmetered connection to the City of Hamilton Waterworks
system for the purpose of supplying water to a private fire
protection system. All unpaid fees and charges are a debt
due to the City of Hamilton and the City of Hamilton may
take such action as it considers necessary and as permitted
by law to collect the debt. Further, as the fees or charges
described in this subsection are for the supply of a public
utility, as defined in the Municipal Act, 2001, where all or part
of such fees or charges remain unpaid, such fees and
charges may be added to the tax roll for the property to
which the public utility was supplied.
By-law R84-026 is amended by adding a new Schedule "H", attached as
,
Appendix A to this by-law.
Section 19 of By-law R84-026 is repealed and replaced with the following
,
new section 19:
SCHEDULES
19. Schedules "A" to "H" are attached to, and form part of, this By-law
This by-law comes into force on July 1, 2012.
.
PASSED this 13th day of June, 2012.
R°
Mayor
To Amend the Waterworks By-law No. R84-026
and Impose Fees or Charges for Private Unmetered Fire Lines
Page 4 of 4
APPENDIX A
SCHEDULE "H"
PRIVATE UNMETERED FIRE LINE FEES
EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2012
Size of Connection Monthly
Fees or
mm inches
Charges
25 1 $ 3.00
38 1.5 $ 6.90
5O 2 $ 12.00
75 3 $ 27.00
100 4 $ 48.00
150 6 $1o8.oo
2OO 8 $192.00
25O 10 $192.00
3OO 12 $192.00



Content from 12140 to amend bylaw no 10118 a bylaw to regulate exterior property maintenancepdf:
Authority: Item 6, General Issues Committee
Report 12-016 (PED11127(c))
CM: June 27, 2012
Bill No. 140
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-140
To Amend By-law No. 10-118, a By-law to Regulate Exterior Property
Maintenance
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law to regulate exterior property maintenance
being City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-118;
AND WHEREAS Council wishes to amend City of Hamilton By-law No. 10-118 to
require property owners and occupants to keep boulevards abutting their properties
free and clear of waste;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
By-law No. 10-118 is amended by adding the following new definition, in
=
alphabetical order, to subsection 2(1):
"boulevard" means that portion of the road allowance which is not used as
travelled roadway or shoulder;
By-law No. 10-118 is amended by adding the following new subsection
,
4(1.1) after subsection 4(1):
4(1.1) Every owner or occupant of property shall keep the boulevard
adjacent to their property free and clear of all waste.
This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
,
PASSED this/ÿ7th day
June, 2012.
R. Bratina
Mayor



Content from 12151 hamilton municipal cemeteries bylawpdf:
This By-law is a consolidated version and includes amendments made by the amending by-
laws listed on the following page. This consolidation is prepared for purposes of
convenience only and is not the official or legal version of the By-law. For accurate
reference to the By-law, certified copies should be obtained through the City Clerk’s Office.
Consolidation Update: January 2024
CITY OF HAMILTON
By-law No. 12-151
A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
OFFICE CONSOLIDATION
Consolidated By-law No. 12-151
Incorporating amendments made by:
By-law No. Effective Date:
21-024 February 24, 2021 Add provisions relating to natural burials, the
interment of pets, and to make other housekeeping
amendments relating to cemetery operations.
23-242 December 23, 2023 To revise section 5.12, No cancellations of Interment
Rights after 30 days.
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 3 of 26
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-151
A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
and REPEALING By-law 81-91 Town of Ancaster; By-law 4459-98 Town of Dundas;
By-law 91-16-C Town of Flamborough; By-law 500-94 Township of Glanbrook;
By-law 95-125 City of Hamilton; By-law 4402-96 City of Stoney Creek
WHEREAS the City of Hamilton owns cemeteries as identified in Part 2 for the benefit of its
residents;
AND WHEREAS the Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002 and its regulations
imparts responsibility to the owners of cemeteries for their management, operation and care;
AND WHEREAS section 150(1) of Ontario Regulation 30/11 under the Funeral, Burial and
Cremation Services Act, 2002 provides that the owners of cemeteries may make by-laws
affecting the operation of the cemeteries;
AND WHEREAS sections 8, 9 and 10 of the Municipal Act, 2001, authorize the City of Hamilton
to pass by-laws necessary and desirable for municipal purposes, and in particular paragraphs 5
through 7 of subsection 10(2) authorize by-laws respecting: the economic, social and
environmental well-being of the municipality; the health, safety and well-being of persons; and
the provision of any service or thing that it considers necessary or desirable for the public.
AND WHEREAS section 425 of the Municipal Act, 2001, authorizes the City of Hamilton pass
by-laws providing that a person who contravenes a by-law of the City of Hamilton passed under
that Act is guilty of an offence;
AND WHEREAS the Municipal Act, 2001, further authorizes the City of Hamilton amongst other
things, to delegate its authority;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, did incorporate, as of January 1st, 2001, the
municipality “City of Hamilton”;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton is successor to the following former area municipalities:
The Corporation of the Town of Ancaster, The Corporation of the Town of Dundas, The
Corporation of the Town of Flamborough, The Corporation of the Township of Glanbrook, The
Corporation of the City of Hamilton and The Corporation of the City of Stoney Creek; and the
successor to the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton Wentworth;
AND WHEREAS the City of Hamilton Act, 1999, provides that the by-laws of the former area
municipalities and the former Regional Municipality of Hamilton Wentworth continue in force in
the City of Hamilton until subsequently amended or repealed by the Council of the City of
Hamilton;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
Part 1 - Preamble
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 4 of 26
The Council of the City of Hamilton passes and enacts this By-law for the operation of
cemeteries owned by the City of Hamilton to keep them attractive and respectful places for the
interment of the deceased.
Part 2 - List of Cemeteries Owned and Operated by Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries
Name Location
Ancaster:
Bethel Cemetery Lot 1, Concession 1, Ancaster
Book/Parkin Cemetery Lot 46, Concession 4, Ancaster
Bowman United Church Lot 50/51, Concession 4, Ancaster
Copetown Cemetery Lot 32, North of Concession 1, Ancaster
Dyment Cemetery Lot 23, Concession 1, Ancaster
File/Patterson Cemetery Lot 20, Concession 4, Ancaster
Garners Corners Lot 47,Concession 3, Ancaster
Jerseyville Cemetery Lot 19, Concession 2, Ancaster
Lynden Cemetery Lot 13, Concession 1, Ancaster
Myers/Bradshaw Lot 24, Concession 5, Ancaster
Dundas:
Binkley Hollow Cemetery Desjardins Avenue, Dundas
Grove Cemetery 129 ½ York Road, Dundas
Harkur Lyon’s Cemetery Forestview Drive, Dundas
Hopkins Cemetery York Rd. near Old Guelph Rd., Dundas
Union Cemetery Osler Drive, Dundas
Flamborough:
Carlisle Anglican Church Cem. Carlisle Rd., S/S 9th Concession W/of Beaumont
Flamborough (Rockton) Cem. Old Highway 8, Rockton Village, Beverly Twnshp
Garden Lane Cemetery 181-7th Conc., west of Garden Lane, E. Flam
Lamb Cemetery W/S Hwy 8, bet. Cooper/Seaton, W. Flamborough
Mount Zion Cemetery Hwy 52 & 2nd Concession, Copetown
Nisbet-Van Sickle Cemetery W/S Lynden Rd., between Hwy 99 & 2nd Conc
Sheffield Cemetery E/S Seaton Road, West Flamborough
St. Albans Cemetery #27 Rockton Road – No 8 Highway, Beverly
Troy Cemetery N/S Hwy 5, west of Lynden Road, W. Flam
Union Cemetery Margaret Street from Highway 5, Waterdown
W. Flamborough Presbyterian Hwy 8/Middletown Rd., Christie’s Corner, W. Flam
West Flamborough Cemetery Bullock’s Corners, Hwy 8, West Flamborough
Westover United Church Cem. S/S 6th Concession, west of Westover W. Flam
Glanbrook:
Auld Kirk Cemetery Kirk Road, Binbrook
Binbrook Baptist Cemetery Binbrook Road, Binbrook
Binbrook United Cemetery Highway 56, Binbrook
Blackheath United Cemetery Haldibrook Road, Binbrook
Christ Church Woodburn Cem. Woodburn Road
Glanbrook Cemetery Binbrook Road between Fletcher & Trinity Church
Knox Presbyterian Cemetery Binbrook Road, Binbrook
North Glanford Cemetery Dickenson Road
Salem Cemetery Salem Road, Glanford
St. Paul’s Anglican Cemetery 2869 Highway 6 South
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 5 of 26
Swayze Cemetery Highway #56 North of #380 Highway #56
White Church Cemetery White Church Road, Glanford
Part 2 - List of Cemeteries Owned and Operated by Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries
Name Location
Hamilton:
Bartonstone Cemetery Stone Church Rd & Upper James Streets
Bartonville Cemetery 1955 King St., East at Bell Avenue
Binkley Cemetery End of Lakelet Dr, off Binkley Crescent
Burkholder United Church 441 Mohawk Road East
Eastlawn Cemetery Corner of Barton & Nash
Hamilton Cemetery 777 York Boulevard
Mt. Hamilton Cemetery Highway 53 at Upper Wellington
Ryckman Family Cemetery E/S of Upper James at rear of #1517
Smith Cemetery Kennedy Road off Upper James
St. George’s Cemetery Rymal Road East bet. Nebo & Dartnall
St. Peter’s Cemetery 534 Mohawk Road West
Stoney Creek Cemetery King Street at Highway 20
Trinity Church Cemetery Highway 53 at Trinity Church Road
Woodland Cemetery 700 Spring Garden Road, Burlington
Young Family Cemetery Upper Wellington at Stone Church
Stoney Creek:
Cline Cemetery 73 Highway #20 – Stoney Creek
Felker Cemetery 120 Mud Street East at First Road West
Fruitland Cemetery 631 Highway #8 at Fruitland
Hannon Free Methodist Cem. 1957 Highway 53 at Fletcher, Hannon
Mountview Gardens 735 Highway #8, west of Jones Road, St.Creek
Mt. Albion Cemetery 225 Upper Mt. Albion Road, Stoney Creek
Smith’s Knoll (Battlefield)
St. George’s Anglican 651 Mud St., East at 6th Road East
Tapleytown Cemetery 385 Mud St., East – West of Tapleytown Road
Tweedside Cemetery 1145 Mud Street – West of Eleventh Road
Van Dusen Cemetery 216 Upper Mt. Albion Road
Winona (Fifty) 1465 Highway #8 – East of Fifty Road
And any other cemetery which may become the responsibility of the City of Hamilton.
Part 3 - Definitions
3.1 In this By-law:
“Business Day” means 8:30 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. on any day on which the Administrative
Office of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries is open for business;
“Care and Maintenance Trust Fund” means the trust fund in which all monies received
by the City of Hamilton for the care and maintenance of lots, monuments, markers and
mausolea have been invested;
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 6 of 26
“Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002” means the Funeral, Burial and
Cremation Services Act, 2002 and its regulations and, if applicable, any predecessor or
successor Act and its regulations, all as amended;
“cemetery” (21-024) means land set aside to be used either for the interment of human
remains or for the scattering of cremated human remains (in designated sections, only),
interment of pet remains (in designated sections, only) and includes a mausoleum,
columbarium or any other structure or building intended for interment that is situated on
the land;
“Certificate of Interment Rights” means the certificate issued by the City of Hamilton to
the purchaser of interment rights to a lot, once payment has been made in full;
“columbarium” means a structure designed for the purpose of interring cremated
human remains in niches or compartments;
“Council” means the Council of the City of Hamilton;
“Director” means the Senior Director of Operations and Waste Management of the
Public Works Department of the City of Hamilton or his or her designate or successor;
“Filming Event” means filming, videotaping, photography or any other form of visual
recording for a feature film, television film, television program, documentary, commercial,
music video, educational film or other purpose outside a studio or film laboratory, but
does not include street interviews, newscasts, press conferences or visual recordings for
personal purposes only;
“Grave” means a lot in the ground which has a minimum size of:
“Adult Grave” (more than 15 years of age): 91cm x 274cm
(36 inches x 96 inches)
“Child Grave)” (from 1 to 15 years of age): 30cm x 121cm
(12 inches x 48 inches)
“Infant Grave” (less than 1 year of age): 30cm x 91cm
(12 inches x 36 inches)
“Cremation Grave: 36cm x 71cm
(14 inches x 28 inches);
“Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries” means the Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries Section
of the Operations and Waste Management Division of the Public Works Department of
the City of Hamilton that has responsibility for the administration, operation and
maintenance of cemeteries;
“human remains” means a dead human body or the remains of a cremated human
body;
“inter” means the burial of human remains and includes the placing of human remains
in a grave, lot, columbarium niche or mausoleum crypt;
“Interment Rights” means the right to require or direct the interment of human remains
or cremated human remains in a grave, lot, niche or crypt and to direct the associated
memorialization subject to the conditions set out in the cemetery by-law;
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 7 of 26
“Interment Rights/Scattering Rights Contract” means the contract entered into by a
purchaser of Interment Rights, Scattering Rights, cemetery products or other cemetery
services, as required under the Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002.
“Interment Rights Holder“ means the person who holds the interment rights with
respect to a lot, whether the person be the purchaser of the rights, the person named in
the Certificate of Interment Rights or such other person to whom the Interment Rights
have been assigned;
“lot“ means an area of land in a cemetery containing, or set aside to contain, human
remains and includes a tomb, crypt or compartment in a mausoleum and a niche or
compartment in a columbarium or any other similar facility or receptacle;
“marker“ means any permanent tombstone, plaque, headstone, cornerstone or
ornament that is set flush with the surface of the ground and is used to mark the location
of a grave;
“mausoleum” means a structure or building, other than a columbarium, used as place
for the interment of human remains in sealed crypts or compartments;
“monument” means any permanent tombstone, plaque, headstone, cornerstone or
ornament that projects from the surface of the ground and is used to mark the location of
a lot or plot;
“Natural Burial Grave” (21-024) means any Interment Right in a Natural Burial Section
which permits the interment of human remains in a biodegradable casket, container,
shroud, or cremation urn.
“Natural Burial Section” (21-024) means an area within a cemetery which is
specifically designed to permit human remains to be returned to the earth as naturally as
possible.
“Officer” means a Municipal Law Enforcement Officer appointed under any City by-law
or any other person assigned or appointed by the Director to administer or enforce this
By-law and includes a person employed by the City whose duties are to enforce this By-
law and a Police Officer;
“Pet Burial Section” (21-024) means an area within a cemetery that is reserved for the
interment of both human and animal remains.
“plot“ means 2 or more lots in which the rights to inter have been sold as a unit;
“Pre-Need Purchase” means the purchase of services for a person who is alive;
“Registrar” means the Registrar appointed under the Funeral, Burial and Cremation
Services Act, 2002;
“scattering ground” means land within a cemetery set aside for the scattering of
cremated human remains;
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 8 of 26
“Scattering Rights” means the right to require or direct the scattering of cremated
human remains;
“Scattering Rights Holder” means the person who holds the scattering rights with
respect to a scattering ground, whether the person be the purchaser of the Rights, the
person named in the Certificate of Scattering Rights or such other person to whom the
Interment Rights have been assigned; and
“Tariff of Charges” means the price list for interment rights, cemetery supplies and
services set in accordance with the Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002
and passed by Council.
Part 4 - INTERPRETATION AND ADMINISTRATION
4.1 Plural
In this By-law a word defined in the singular number has a corresponding meaning when
used in the plural and vice versa.
4.2 Table of Contents, etc.
The Table of Contents, headings and subheadings used in this By-law shall not form a
part of it, but shall be deemed to be inserted for convenience of reference only.
4.3 Schedules
The Schedules attached to this By-law form a part of it.
4.4 Application
The provisions of this By-law apply to cemeteries owned by the City of Hamilton.
4.5 Director Responsibility
The Director is responsible for the management, operation and maintenance of
cemeteries owned by the City of Hamilton and is authorized to administer and enforce
this By-law with delegated authority granted by Council to execute the provisions of the
By-law, including the imposition of conditions as necessary to ensure compliance with
this By-law.
4.6 Director Delegation
The Director may assign duties or delegate tasks under this By-law whether in his or her
absence or otherwise.
4.7 Director Discretion
The Director may enlarge, reduce, replot, change the boundaries of, or grade a
cemetery upon approval of the Registrar as required under the Funeral, Burial and
Cremation Services Act, 2002.
4.8 Notices
All notices required by this By-law, or by the Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act,
2002 to be given to:
(a) an Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder may be given personally,
or by regular mail to the last known address of the Interment Rights Holder,
Scattering Rights Holder or their heir or representative;
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 9 of 26
(b) the Director or Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries may be given by registered mail,
by fax or in person during a business day at the Administrative Office of Hamilton
Municipal Cemeteries.
4.9 Director Permission
Where approval of any type from the Director is required under this By-law, such
permission may be refused or withdrawn by the Director at any time in his or her sole
discretion.
Part 5 - INTERMENT RIGHTS and SCATTERING RIGHTS
Sale and Purchase
5.1 Sale
No person shall sell Interment Rights or Scattering Rights except a person authorized by
the Director.
5.2 Single-in-a-Row Grave
The purchaser of a single-in-a-row grave, as set out in the Tariff of Charges, may not:
(a) choose the location of the grave; or
(b) be a Pre-Need purchaser.
5.3 Preferred Single Grave
The purchaser of a preferred single grave, as set out in the Tariff of Charges, may:
(a) choose the location of the grave;
(b) be a Pre-Need purchaser; and
(c) pay in installments, as determined by the Director in accordance with the
Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002 and the Tariff of Charges.
5.4 Interment Rights/Scattering Rights Contract
At the time Interment Rights or Scattering Rights are purchased and paid in full, the
Director or his or her designate shall provide the Interment Rights Holder with a copy of
the Interment Rights/Scattering Rights Contract signed by the Director and the Interment
Rights or Scattering Rights Holder and a copy of the Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries By-
law.
5.5 Interment Rights Certificate and Scattering Rights Certificate
At the time Interment Rights or Scattering Rights are paid for in full, the Director shall
provide the Interment Rights Holder with a Certificate of Interment Rights or Certificate of
Scattering Rights or a Prepayment Certificate.
5.6 Change of Address
An Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder shall inform Hamilton Municipal
Cemeteries forthwith of any changes to the information contained in their Interment
Rights/Scattering Rights Contract, including changes to their address or telephone
number.
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 10 of 26
Transfer
5.7 Transfer to Others
An Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder may transfer their Interment
Rights or Scattering Rights by:
(a) giving written notice to Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries of the name and address
of the transferee and the date of the transfer; and
(b) paying the transfer fee as set out in the Tariff of Charges.
5.8 Transfer by Heirs
An heir or representative of a deceased Interment Rights Holder may transfer the
deceased Interment Rights Holder’s Interment Rights or deceased Scattering Right
Holder’s Scattering Rights by:
(a) giving proof in writing satisfactory to the Director that they have the right to
transfer the Interment Rights or Scattering Rights.
(b) giving notice to Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries of the name and address of the
transferee and the date of the transfer; and
(c) paying the transfer fee as set out in the Tariff of Charges.
Third-Party Resale
5.9 Re-Sale of Rights – Third Party:
An Interment Rights Holder or a Scattering Rights Holder may re-sell their Interment
Rights or Scattering Rights to a third party before the Interment Rights or Scattering
Rights are exercised for no more than the current price listed on the Tariff of Charges.
5.10 Re-sale of Rights Requirements:
Interment Rights or Scattering Rights are transferred to a third party only when:
(a) all of the following, if applicable, have been provided to the satisfaction of the
Director:
(i) written confirmation from the Interment Rights Holder or the Scattering
Rights Holder of their intent to sell the Interment Rights or the Scattering
Rights to a named purchaser.
(ii) written proof that the person intending to sell Interment Rights or
Scattering Rights is the Interment Rights Holder or the Scattering Rights
Holder;
(iii) the original Interment Rights Certificate or Scattering Rights Certificate
endorsed by the current Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights
Holder
(iv) payment of the administration fee as set out in the Tariff of Charges;
(v) any other documentation in the Interment Rights Holder’s or the
Scattering Rights Holder’s possession relating to the Interment Rights or
Scattering Rights.
(b) a new Interment Rights Certificate or Scattering Rights Certificate has been
issued to the named purchaser.
Cancellation of Interment Rights or Scattering Rights:
5.11 Cancellation of Interment Rights within 30-Days:
An Interment Rights/Scattering Rights Contract may be cancelled within 30 days of
signing if the purchaser provides written notice of the cancellation to the Director. A
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 11 of 26
refund of all monies paid by the purchaser will be made in accordance with the Funeral,
Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002. If any portion of the Interment Rights or
Scattering Rights have been exercised, the purchaser or the Interment Rights Holder or
Scattering Rights Holder is not entitled to cancel the Interment Rights/Scattering Rights
Contract or re-sell the Interment Rights or Scattering Rights.
5.12 No Cancellation of Interment Rights After 30-Days: (23-242)
An Interment Rights or Scattering Rights contract may not be cancelled after 30 days of
signing. Notwithstanding this Section 5.12, an Interment Rights Holder or a Scattering
Rights Holder may re-sell their Interment Rights or Scattering Rights to a third party in
accordance with section 5.9 and 5.10 of this By-law and in accordance with the Act and
the Regulations made thereunder.
5.13 Rights Abandoned:
The City of Hamilton may apply for a declaration that Interment Rights are abandoned
and then resell the Interment Rights in accordance with the Funeral, Burial and
Cremation Services Act, 2002.
Corrections
5.14 Corrections:
The Director may correct any error made in the sale, purchase, transfer, repurchase or
resale of Interment Rights or Scattering Rights and in correcting such error he or she
may substitute a lot of equal value and similar location or cancel the transaction and
refund all payments. The Director shall give notice to the Interment Rights Holder or
Scattering Rights Holder of both the error and the correction to the error, provided that
no notice shall be required to be given in regard to a typographical error, error of
calculation or similar error.
Part 6- INTERMENTS AND DISINTERMENTS
General
6.1 Director Approval
The Director:
(a) may decide that an interment or disinterment:
(i) may take place despite any other provision of this By-law provided that
any other applicable statute, regulation or by-law is complied with;
(ii) shall not take place due to weather or ground conditions; and
(b) shall be in attendance at each interment or disinterment.
6.2 Opening a Lot
No person shall prepare a lot for interment or disinterment except a person authorized
by the Director.
6.3 Damage to Containers
Containers holding human remains may be damaged during interment or disinterment
and the City of Hamilton shall not be responsible for repairing or replacing such
containers or paying any compensation.
Interments
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 12 of 26
6.4 Notice in Advance
An Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder, their heir or representative, or a
Funeral Director shall, at least 1 business day in advance of an interment, give notice to
Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries:
(a) authorizing any interment in the Interment Rights Holder’s lot or, for a Scattering
Rights Holder, in a scattering ground; and,
(b) requesting that the lot be prepared for the interment; and
(c) giving the particulars as to the location, depth, width and length of the container
holding the human remains to be interred.
6.5 Notice not Provided in Advance
Where an Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder, their heir or
representative, or a Funeral Director gives notice under section 6.4 less than 1 business
day in advance, a lot may be prepared for the interment at the discretion of the Director.
6.6 Notice of Arrangements by Telephone:
An Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder, their heir or representative, or a
Funeral Director may make required interment arrangements with the Hamilton
Municipal Cemetery Administrative Office via telephone (but not Voice Mail); or fax
during regular business hours provided that adequate notice is given under section 6.4.
6.7 Authorization
Notice under section 6.4 or section 6.5 shall be given by all of the Interment Rights
Holders for a lot or Scattering Rights Holder for a scattering ground and, if one or more
of the Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder are dead, notice shall instead
be given by their heir or representative. In the alternative, notice under section 6.4 or
section 6.5 may be given by a Funeral Director.
6.8 Human Remains (21-024)
Only human remains shall be interred in a lot, unless the interment takes place in a
designated Pet Burial Section of the cemetery.
6.9 No Interment
No interment shall take place except where:
(a) a burial permit or Certificate of Cremation under the Vital Statistics Act has been
issued;
(b) all applicable fees under the Tariff of Charges have been paid; and
(c) an Interment Rights/Scattering Rights Contract has been signed.
6.10 Limits – Cremation Grave
No more than 2 interments of cremated human remains shall take place in any 1
cremation grave purchased on or after the date this By-law is in force.
6.11 Limits – Preferred Single Grave
No more than 2 interments of human remains that are not cremated and 2 interments of
cremated human remains (for a maximum of 4 persons) shall take place in any 1
preferred single grave purchased on or after the date this By-law is in force.
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 13 of 26
6.12 Limits – Single-in-a-Row Grave
No more than 2 interments of human remains that are not cremated and 2 interments of
cremated human remains (for a maximum of 4 persons) shall take place in any 1
preferred single grave purchased on or after the date this By-law is in force.
6.13 Limits – Columbarium Niche or Compartment
No more than 2 interments of cremated human remains shall take place in any 1 niche
or compartment in a columbarium purchased on or after the date this By-law is in force.
6.14 Limits – Mausoleum Crypt
No more than 1 interment of human remains that are not cremated shall take place in
any 1 crypt in a mausoleum purchased on or after the date this By-law is in force.
6.15 By-law Repeal
Notwithstanding the repeal of a by-law under Section 12.1, the by-law shall continue to
apply in respect of the number of interments in any lot purchased before the date this
By-law is in force.
6.16 Container Requirement
Human remains to be interred in a lot shall be in a container:
(a) that is securely sealed;
(b) of sufficient strength to remain intact during interment; and
(c) of a size to permit interment within the lot.
6.16.1 Outer Interment Container- Material (21-024)
(a) The Cemetery reserves the right to require an outer Interment container
made of concrete or other comparable materials in certain areas of the
Cemetery as noted on the Tariff of Charges and the Interment Rights
Certificate at the time of sale.
(b) Interments placed at extra depth require an outer Interment container
made of concrete or other comparable materials, where space permits.
6.17 Hours for Interments (21-024)
Interments may take place between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. from Monday
to Friday and between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 11:30 a.m. on Saturdays of three-day
weekends. Notwithstanding the foregoing, an interment may take place on any day and
at any time:
(a) with the advance permission of the Director and for the applicable fee; or
(b) set out in a certificate issued by the Ministry of Health or an order issued
by the Coroner's Office.
6.18 Scattering (21-024)
(a) No person shall scatter cremated human remains in a cemetery.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, if scattering grounds have been set
aside, cremated human remains may be scattered in such scattering
grounds with the advance notice; and,
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 14 of 26
(i) a Certificate of Cremation under the Vital Statistics Act has been
issued;
(ii) all applicable fees under the Tariff of Charges have been paid;
and,
(iii) a Scattering Rights Contract has been signed.
(b) No person shall scatter cremated human remains on a cemetery lot
containing human remains.
(c) Where a scattering is permitted under this By-law, it shall be performed
by a member of the cemetery staff, or a member of the cemetery staff
shall be in attendance when the cremated remains are scattered within
the designated Scattering Ground.
(d) Each purchase of scattering rights shall be limited to one (1) scattering
opportunity for one (1) set of cremated human remains.
6.18.1 Pets or Other Animals (21-024)
6.18.1.1 Requirements for Interment (21-024)
No pets or other animals are permitted to be interred on cemetery grounds, except
where:
(a) the interment takes place in a designated Pet Burial Section of the
cemetery;
(b) the applicable fee under the Tariff of Charges for an interment within the
Pet Burial Section has been paid;
(c) permission of the Director has been granted and is shown on the
Certificate of Interment Rights; and
(d) the pet or other animal is in the cremated form or, if not in the cremated
form, enclosed within an approved container no larger than 24 inches in
length and 18 inches in width and height.
6.18.1.2 Interment of Human Remains Provisions Apply (21-024)
The provisions of section 6.18.1 shall apply in addition to any other provision of this By-
law that applies to the interment of human remains.
6.18.2 Natural Burial Sections (21-024)
6.18.2.1 Number of Interments (21-024)
A maximum of one (1) interment of human remains that are not cremated and one (1)
interment of cremated human remains, or two (2) cremated remains may be buried in
each lot within the Natural Burial Section. The interment of human remains that are not
cremated shall be performed at standard depth, at least two feet beneath the natural
level of the ground surface.
6.18.2.2 Cremation Interment (21-024)
Where Interment Rights are purchased in the Natural Burial Section with the intent of
having an interment of cremated human remains as the second Interment in the grave,
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 15 of 26
the interment of the cremated human remains must not proceed until the interment of
human remains that are not cremated have been completed.
6.18.2.3 Witnessing the Interment (21-024)
The Director may limit the number of witnesses to an interment service in the Natural
Burial Section to preserve the environmental sanctity or health and safety of those
persons attending the interment.
6.18.2.4 Caskets or Container for Full Body Interment (21-024)
A casket, shroud or container meeting the following criteria shall be provided by a
licenced funeral establishment for the Interment of human remains that are not cremated
within the Natural Burial Section:
a) Composed of sustainable and full biodegradable fibers or materials;
b) Free of non-biodegradable resins, glues or bonding agents;
c) Composed of interior finishing fabricated from biodegradable fibers or
material;
d) Free from high gloss finish lacquers, paints or prepared surfaces that are
non-biodegradable;
e) Free of any interior liner, bag or wrapping that is fabricated from a non-
biodegradable material;
f) Free of any memento, article or personal belonging that is composed of
non-biodegradable material;
g) Fashioned to include a supportive bottom that is made from sustainable
and biodegradable materials and that is stable and strong enough to be
transported and placed on a grave lowering device; and
h) Include handles in the event of a casket.
6.18.2.5 Container for Cremated Remains Interment (21-024)
A container meeting the following criteria shall be provided for the Interment of cremated
remains within the Natural Burial Section:
a) Composed of sustainable and fully biodegradable fibers and material;
b) Free of non-biodegradable resins, glues or bonding agents;
c) Composed of interior finishing fabricated from biodegradable fibers or
bonding agents;
d) Free from high gloss finish lacquers, paints or prepared surfaces that are
non biodegradable;
e) Free of any interior liner, bag or wrapping that is fabricated from a non-
biodegradable material; and
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 16 of 26
f) Free of any memento, article or personal belonging that is composed of
non-biodegradable material.
6.18.2.6 Outer Containers (21-024)
No concrete, metal vaults, or other outer containers will be permitted in Natural Burial
Section.
6.18.2.7 Scattering of Cremated Remains (21-024)
The scattering of cremated remains will be permitted only within designated areas within
the Natural Burial Section. Surface scattering is not permitted in any other area of the
Natural Burial Section.
6.18.2.8 Removal of Caskets, Containers, or Cremated Remains (21-024)
Interments performed within the Natural Burial Section will be regarded as permanent
and irreversible from the interment date as all Interments are performed using
biodegradable containers. The Cemetery shall have no obligation to disinter any remains
within the Natural Burial Section unless required to do so by applicable law or court
order. Where ordered to disinter human remains that are not cremated or cremated
human remains, the requesting party shall be responsible to pay any and all fees
associated with the disinterment.
6.18.2.9 Human Remains (21-024)
Human remains to be interred within the Natural Burial Section shall be free from
embalming solutions, prosthetics and any other non-naturally occurring elements.
6.18.2.10 General Care of Natural Burial Graves (21-024)
In order to preserve the natural environment, the use of pesticides within the Natural
Burial Section will not be permitted.
6.18.2.11 Planting Restrictions (21-024)
No person shall place live or artificial plant material on a grave within the Natural Burial
Section.
6.18.2.12 Tributes of Remembrance (21-024)
To preserve the natural setting, no person shall place an article of any kind within the
Natural Burial Section.
6.18.2.13 Memorialization (21-024)
To preserve the natural surroundings of the Natural Burial Section, no person shall place
a memorial on a grave within the Natural Burial Section.
6.18.2.14 Inscription on Communal Memorial (21-024)
Inscriptions on a communal memorial feature within the Natural Burial Section as
provided by Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries may be purchased by paying the applicable
fee under the Tariff of Charges.
6.18.3 Pallbearers (21-024)
For safety reasons, municipal cemetery staff are not permitted to act as pallbearers
during a funeral service. All funeral service providers shall contract out pallbearer
services to companies with staff specifically trained and insured for this purpose or use
their internal staff.
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 17 of 26
Disinterments
6.19 Disinterment
No disinterment shall take place except where:
(a) a certificate issued by the Medical Officer of Health and the Director, confirming
the Funeral, Burial and Cremation Services Act, 2002 has been complied with, is
affixed to the container holding the disinterred human remains;
(b) all applicable fees under the Tariff of Charges have been paid; and
(c) the disinterred human remains are placed in a concrete crypt or vault after
disinterment and before reinterment.
6.20 Corrections
The Director may correct any error made in an interment. The Director shall give notice
to the Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder of both the error and the
correction to the error once the error has been corrected, provided that no notice shall
be required to be given in regard to a typographical error, error of calculation or similar
error. In the event an error may involve the disinterment of human remains, the
Direction shall first obtain the approval of any regulatory authority and the Interment
Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder.
Part 7 - MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND MAUSOLEA
7.1 Schedule A
All monuments, markers and mausolea, where installed, altered, repaired or removed by
a person other than an employee or contractor of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries, shall
be installed, altered, repaired or removed in accordance with Schedule A.
7.2 Prohibition
No person shall install or continue to install, alter, repair or remove a monument, marker
or mausoleum while an interment or disinterment is taking place in the vicinity until the
conclusion of the interment or disinterment.
Part 8 - CARE OF LOTS
8.1 Schedule B
All lots, where cared for by a person other than an employee or contractor of Hamilton
Municipal Cemeteries, shall be cared for in accordance with Schedule B.
Part 9 - RULES
Entry
9.1 Cemetery Hours
No person:
(a) shall enter or exit a cemetery except through established gates and roadways;
(b) shall enter or remain in a cemetery before sunrise or after sundown except:
(i) for employees or contractors of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries and
emergency personnel including, but not limited to, police and firefighters;
or
(ii) with the advance permission of the Director;
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 18 of 26
(c) responsible for the care of a child under the age of 12 years, shall permit such
child to enter or remain in a cemetery unless they are accompanied and
supervised by an adult; or
(d) shall permit an animal to enter or remain in a cemetery except an animal that is
leashed and under the control of a person in accordance with any applicable
animal control by-law or legislation.
General Conduct
9.2 Rules for Visitors
While in a cemetery, no person shall:
Injury or Damage
(a) engage in activity that may cause injury to any person or damage to any property
including any vegetation, monument, marker, mausoleum, columbarium or other
structure or building;
Climbing
(b) climb any vegetation, monument, marker, mausoleum, columbarium or other
structure;
Sports
(c) play any game or sport including, but not limited to, skateboarding, roller-blading
or tobogganing;
Firearms
(d) discharge any firearm, except with the advance, written permission of the
Director for a funeral or to control wildlife;
Disturbance
(e) disturb any person attending an interment;
Nuisance
(f) commit a nuisance or create a disturbance;
Rubbish
(g) throw or deposit or cause to be deposited any rubbish, refuse, waste or litter,
except in receptacles provided for the purpose;
Food and Drink
(h) consume any food or drink, except food or drink consumed as part of a religious
or cultural interment rite; or
Alcohol
(i) have or consume an alcoholic beverage.
Commercial Activity
9.3 Rules for Commercial Activities
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 19 of 26
While in a cemetery, no person shall
Filming
(a) undertake or permit the undertaking of a filming event without a valid film permit
issued for the filming event under the Hamilton Film Permit By-law;
Solicitation
(b) solicit work of any kind; or
Gratuities
(c) give a gratuity to any employee or contractor of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries.
Vehicles
9.4 Vehicular Activity
While in a cemetery, no person shall:
Recreational Vehicles
(a) drive, stop or park a motorized snow vehicle or off-road vehicle;
Speed Limit
(b) drive a vehicle at a speed of more than 10 kilometres per hour or a speed as
otherwise posted;
Grass or Flower Beds
(c) drive, stop or park a vehicle on the grass or a flower bed except with the
advance, written permission of the Director; or
Heavy Loads
(d) drive, stop or park a heavy load in a cemetery except with the advance, written
permission of the Director.
Part 10 - ENFORCEMENT
10.1 Enforcement
The By-law may be enforced by an Officer.
10.2 Authority
Cemetery staff authorized by the Director and Officers have authority to direct any
person who does not comply with this By-law to leave a cemetery.
10.3 Offence
Every person who contravenes any provision of this By-law is, upon conviction, guilty of
an offence and is liable to a fine of not more than:
(a) $5,000 for a first offence;
(b) $25,000 for a second offence; or
(c) $100,000 for a third or subsequent offence.
10.4 Penalty
Where a person has been convicted of an offence, the court in which the conviction has
been entered and any court of competent jurisdiction thereafter may, in addition to any
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 20 of 26
other remedy or penalty provided for by law, make an order prohibiting the continuation
or repetition of the offence by the person convicted.
PART 11 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.1 By-law Name
This By-law may be referred to as the Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries By-law.
11.2 Validity of By-law
If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any subsection, section or part of this By-law
invalid, it is the intention of Council that the remainder of the By-law shall continue to be
in force.
PART 12 - REPEALS & ENACTMENTS
12.1 By-laws Repealed
The following by-laws, all as amended, are repealed.
(i) By-law 81-91 – Town of Ancaster
(ii) By-law 4459-98 – Town of Dundas
(iii) By-law 91-16-C – Town of Flamborough
(iv) By-law 500-94 – Township of Glanbrook
(v) By-law 95-125 – City of Hamilton
(vi) By-law 4402-96 – City of Stoney Creek
12.2 By-law in Force
This By-law shall come into force on the day the Registrar approves it.
PASSED this 27th day of June, 2012.
R. Bratina R. Caterini
Mayor City Clerk
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 21 of 26
SCHEDULE A
MONUMENTS, MARKERS AND MAUSOLEA
DELIVERY, INSTALLATION, ALTERATION, REPAIR AND REMOVAL
General
1.1 Authorization
The installation of a monument, marker or mausoleum shall be arranged by the
Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder or their heir or representative with
Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries.
1.2 Contracts and Fees
Before a monument, marker or mausoleum is installed, all contracts shall be signed and
all fees, including fees for the installation of a foundation, paid as required under this By-
law and the Tariff of Charges.
1.3 Foundation/Marker Permit
A monument, marker or mausoleum shall be delivered to the cemetery with a
Foundation/Marker Permit that includes:
(a) the name and address of the Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder
or their heir or representative;
(b) instructions for the placement of the monument, marker or mausoleum;
(c) for a monument:
(i) the height, width and length of the die;
(ii) the height, width and length of the base;
(iii) the overall size; and
(iv) the design and inscription;
(d) for a marker, the width and length;
(e) for a mausoleum, a work plan including the building specifications approved in
advance by the Director; and
(f) the fee as required under the Tariff of Charges.
1.4 Composition
A monument, marker or mausoleum:
(a) shall be constructed of granite or other industry standard material that is free
from defects affecting durability, provided that where bronze is used:
(i) it shall be used only for the fixtures such as doors, window grilles or
statuary of mausoleums or for tablets attached to markers;
(ii) it shall meet industry standards for bronze; and
(iii) its casting shall be true and without any sand-like roughness; and
(b) shall not be constructed of veneered marble, wood, iron or artificial stone.
1.5 Inscriptions
Any inscription on a monument, marker or mausoleum:
(a) shall be in keeping with the dignity and decorum of the cemetery. If, in the
opinion of the Director, an inscription is not in keeping with the dignity and
decorum of the cemetery, he or she may have such inscription removed at the
cost of the Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder or their heir or
representative;
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 22 of 26
(b) where monuments are located back-to-back, shall not be on the back of a
monument; and
(c) where monuments are not located back-to-back, may be on the back of a
monument with the advance, written permission of the Director. In giving or
refusing his or her permission, the Director may consider, amongst other things,
the number, size, location and character of existing monuments, markers or
mausoleums on the lot and adjoining lots.
1.6 Time of Installation
All foundations for monuments and mausoleums shall be installed by the employees or
contractors of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries from April 1 to November 15 of each year
and shall not be installed by any other person
1.7 Alteration
A monument, marker or mausoleum shall not be altered or removed without the
advance, written permission of the Director.
1.8 Surface Protection
A monument, marker or mausoleum shall not be installed, altered or removed unless
plywood is laid over the ground to protect the surface from damage.
1.9 Safety
If, in the opinion of the Director, any monument, marker or mausoleum is or could
become hazardous to any person in a cemetery, such monument, marker or mausoleum
may be repaired, reset or laid down by the employees or contractors of Hamilton
Municipal Cemeteries.
1.10 Risk
Any person other than an employee or contractor of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries
installing, altering or removing a monument, marker or mausoleum does so entirely at
their own risk, including assuming the risk for any loss of or damage to a monument,
marker or mausoleum or any injury to themselves occurring during or after installation or
repair.
1.10.1 Memorial benches and Memorial Niche benches (21-024)
Memorial benches and memorial niche benches shall be purchased through the
Hamilton Municipal Cemetery office by paying the applicable fee under the Tariff of
Charges. Memorial benches and a concrete pad with a minimum size of 3’ x 6’ x 4” shall
be installed by Cemetery staff.
Monuments
1.11 Monument Delivery
A monument shall not be delivered to a cemetery for installation unless the foundation
has been completed.
1.12 Monument Installation
In addition to meeting the applicable requirements of Part 1 of this Schedule:
Monument Placement
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 23 of 26
(a) for a single-grave lot in locations designated by the Director or for a two-grave
plot, no more than 1 monument shall be placed at the head of a lot or plot;
Thickness
(b) for a monument of a height of 123 centimetres (48 inches) or less, the die shall
be no less than 20.50 centimetres (8 inches) thick;
(c) for a monument of a height more than 123 centimetres (48 inches), the die shall
be no less than 25.40 centimetres (10 inches) thick;
Dowels
(d) a monument shall have dowels made of a non-corrosive material (preferably 300
series stainless steel or bronze) of no less than 1.27 centimetres (1/2 inch) in
diameter, 7.63 centimetres (3 inches) in length inserted in a hole no more than
.32 centimetres (1/8 inch) larger than the dowel;
Bases
(e) a monument shall have a base of at least 20.32 centimetres (8 inches) in height,
that is wider and longer than the die providing a border of at least 7.6 centimetres
(3 inches) on all sides, shall be smooth sawn on the bottom, and shall be no
more than 7.6 centimetres (3 inches) from the side lot lines of the grave;
Height
(f) for a two-grave plot, a monument shall have a height of no more than 122.98
centimetres (48 inches) including the base; a base of no more than 96.52 by
35.56 centimetres (38 by 14 inches);
Horizontal Force
(g) a monument shall be able to withstand a minimum of 45.36 kilograms (100
pounds) of horizontal force without toppling before caulking;
Vertical Joints
(h) a monument shall have no exposed vertical joints; and
Overall Restriction
(i) notwithstanding any other provision of this By-law, a monument shall cover no
more than 10 percent of a lot.
1.12.1 Pictures, Etchings and Photographs on Monuments and Markers (21-024)
(a) Prior to the placement of any picture, etching or photograph on a
monument or marker, the written consent of the Interment Rights
Holder(s) shall be provided to cemetery staff.
(b) Pictures, etchings and photographs shall be in keeping with the dignity
and decorum of the cemetery. If, in the opinion of the Director, a picture,
etching or photograph is not in keeping with the dignity and decorum of
the cemetery, they may have such inscription removed at the cost of the
Interment Rights Holder or their heir or representative.
(c) Pictures or photographs must be manufactured in a permanent, weather
resistant material.
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 24 of 26
(d) Pictures, etchings or photographs of a non-permanent material will be
removed and disposed of by the Cemetery without notification and at the
cost of the Interment Rights Holder or their heir or representative.
(e) The Cemetery assumes no responsibility or liability for a picture,
photograph or etching on a monument or marker that becomes lost,
faded, cracked, damaged, or needs to be removed.
Markers
1.13 Time of Installation
Markers shall be delivered to cemeteries for installation between April 1 and November 1
of each year.
1.14 Marker Installation
In addition to meeting the applicable requirements of Part I of this Schedule:
Marker Sizes
(a) for a lot with no monument, no more than 1 marker shall be placed at the head of
a lot and:
Adult Grave
(i) for an adult grave, a marker shall have a surface area of no more than
60.96 by 45.72 centimetres (24 by 18 inches) or 10 percent of the lot,
whichever is less;
Cremation Grave
(ii) for a cremation grave, a marker shall have a surface area no more than
30.48 by 24.40 centimetres (12 by 10 inches); and
Child or Infant Grave
(iii) for a child or infant grave, a marker shall have a surface area of no more
than 30.48 by 24.40 centimetres (12 by 10 inches) to 45.72 by 35.56
centimetres (18 by 14 inches) depending on the size of the grave;
Marker Sizes for Plots
(b) for 2, 3 or 4 grave plots, no more than 1 marker shall be placed at the foot of
each grave and the marker shall have a surface area of no more than 60.96 by
45.72 centimetres (24 by 18 inches);
Cornerstones for Plots
(c) for 2, 3 or 4 grave plots, no more than 4 cornerstones shall be placed on a plot
and each cornerstone shall have a surface area of no more than 15.24 by 15.24
centimetres (6 by 6 inches);
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 25 of 26
Set Level
(d) a marker shall be flat on top and flush with the ground so that a lawn mower can
pass safely over it; and
Use of Bronze
(e) where a marker is bronze:
(i) the marker shall be cast with integral bosses on the back as specified by
Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries such bosses being capable of receiving
anchor lugs, supplied by the dealer, of brass or bronze of .95 centimetres
(3/8 inch) in diameter and maximum size of 7.6 centimetres (3 inches) in
length; and,
(ii) the marker shall be bolted through granite having a surface area of 45.72
by 60.96 centimetres (18 by 24) inches and a thickness of 10.16
centimetres (4 inches).
Mausolea
1.15 Delivery
In addition to meeting the applicable requirements of Part 1 of this Schedule, a
mausoleum shall not be delivered to a cemetery unless:
(a) a work plan including the building specifications has first been submitted to and
approved by the Director;
(b) the foundation has been completed; and
(c) the mausoleum has no exposed vertical joints.
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES
CONSOLIDATED HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES BY-LAW 12-151
Page 26 of 26
SCHEDULE B
CARE OF LOTS
General
Risk
Any person other than an employee or contractor of Hamilton Municipal Cemeteries,
including an Interment Rights Holder or Scattering Rights Holder or their heir or
representative, caring for a lot does so entirely at their own risk, including assuming the
risk for any loss of or damage to an item placed, planted or installed on a lot or attached
to a monument or any injury to themselves.
Restrictions
Nothing, including but not limited to nails, wire, glass, pottery or a container that retains
water, that is or could become hazardous to any person in a cemetery, shall be placed,
planted or installed on a lot or attached to a monument, marker or mausolea.
BY-LAW NO. 12-151 A BY-LAW RESPECTING THE CITY OF HAMILTON’S CEMETERIES



Content from 12220 to amend bylaw no 12031 a bylaw for responsible animal ownershippdf:
Authority: Item 12, General Issues Committee
Report 12-022 (FCS12024(a))
CM: September 26, 2012
Bill No. 220
CITY OF HAMILTON
BY-LAW NO. 12-220
To Amend By-law No. 12-031, a By-law For Responsible Animal Ownership
WHEREAS Council enacted a by-law for responsible animal ownership being City of Hamilton
By-law 12-031;
AND WHEREAS this By-law provides for the addition of a Leash Free Park to subsection 7.4(a)
of By-law 12-031;
NOW THEREFORE the Council of the City of Hamilton enacts as follows:
1. By-law 12-031 is amended in accordance with sections 2 and 3 and these sections are
deemed to include all necessary amendments to grammar including punctuation.
2. Subsection 7.4(a) of By-law 12-031 is amended by adding, in alphabetical order, the
following to the list of Leash Free Parks:
Strachan Street General Open Space (Ward 2 - a portion on the East end of 51-134
Strachan Street), as shown in the attached Appendix 2 on Map F, from 6 a.m. to 11
p.m. every day;
3. Appendix 2 of By-law 12-031 is amended by adding Map F, attached as Schedule 1, after
Map E.
4. This By-law comes into force on the day it is passed.
PASSED this 10th day of October, 2012.
}ratina R°
Mayor
SCHEDULE 1
Appendix 2, Map F
413 405 ' 394
368
' 1 aSO
LEGEND
D Leash Free Park
Strachan Street
General Open Space
Date:
Sept. 26,2012 i ÿ"ÿ I
IUiHil
......... Hamilton
PLÿNNNG AND ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT DEPAFÿTMENT
© Terÿnet Lÿnd Infÿnnaÿon Services Inc.andÿ ÿnÿrs.



